---
title: "Future Food-Tech unveils 19 innovators with moonshot-potential technologies"
date: 2021-02-16 16:41:12
lastmod: 2021-02-16 16:41:12
slug: future-food-tech-unveils-19-innovators-moonshot-potential-technologies
company_name: "Future Food-Tech"
company_link: "https://www.futurefoodtechsf.com"
description: "At Future Food-Tech’s flagship summit on March 11-12, nineteen start-ups will showcase their breakthrough technologies, their transformative solutions and, above all, their passion to drive forward change across the most pressing topics in the industry: Gut Health and the Microbiome, Plant-Based Alternatives, Cell-Based Proteins, Ingredient Innovation, Food Waste and the Supply Chain."
excerpt: "At Future Food-Tech’s flagship summit on March 11-12, nineteen start-ups will showcase their breakthrough technologies, their transformative solutions and, above all, their passion to drive forward change across the most pressing topics in the industry: Gut Health and the Microbiome, Plant-Based Alternatives, Cell-Based Proteins, Ingredient Innovation, Food Waste and the Supply Chain."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial, Molecular Farming, Algae, Fungi]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Eggs, Seafood, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [International]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [1356, 5660, 6178, 7174, 7241, 8332, 8360]
images: ["Meet the Start-Ups.png","Innovation Challenge FFT (1).png", "Innovation Challenge FFT (2).png"]
featured_image: "Meet the Start-Ups.png"
additional_images:
  - src: "Innovation Challenge FFT (1).png"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
  - src: "Innovation Challenge FFT (2).png"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 8454
---
**The unshakable determination of food-tech start-ups in the face of the
unprecedented challenges the world has experienced this year shows the
pivotal role they will play in the future of food-tech.**

At Future Food-Tech's flagship summit on March 11-12, nineteen start-ups
will showcase their breakthrough technologies, their transformative
solutions and, above all, their passion to drive forward change across
the most pressing topics in the industry: **Gut Health and the
Microbiome, Plant-Based Alternatives, Cell-Based Proteins, Ingredient
Innovation, Food Waste** and **the Supply Chain.**

**Gut Health and the Microbiome**

**Green Spot Technologies** (Kellogg Company Innovation Challenge
Finalist)

"Green Spot Technologies upcycles food by-products from processing
industries (peels, seeds, pulps), which are otherwise discarded as
composting waste or used as animal feed (down-cycled), into high-value
functional ingredients" shares Ninna Granucci, CEO of Green Spot
Technologies.

**FIBERVITA** (Kellogg Company Innovation Challenge Finalist)

"We pioneered in developing a proprietary technology at industrial scale
to launch an upcycled ingredient portfolio, consisting of sustainable,
multifunctional, versatile, healthy, clean label, allergen-, gluten- and
gmo-free cassava based fibrous ingredients. Our purpose is to provide
cassava fibers to nourish beyond food, i.e. support health and wellness"
explains João Francisco de Lima, RDI Director of FIBERVITA.

**Comet Bio** (Kellogg Company Innovation Challenge Finalist)

"We upcycle crop leftovers into healthy and sustainable ingredients for
use in supplements, foods, and beverages using our patented extraction
technology. Comet Bio's proprietary process is innovative and
differentiates us from other ingredient manufacturers. Our Arrabina
Arabinoxylan Plant Fiber Extract has superior tolerability and
functionality within the prebiotic market" notes Rich Troyer, CEO of
Comet Bio.

**AgriFiber** (TechHub Virtual Booth)

"AgriFiber's patented purification and extraction technologies allow us
to upcycle fiber from residual agricultural materials --- offering more
functional and health benefits than any other fiber ingredient. We
partner with food and beverage industry customers to make their products
more profitable and healthier for the planet" explains Jonathan Kahn,
CEO of AgriFiber.

**Plant-Based Alternatives**

**77 FOODS** (Unilever Innovation Challenge Finalist)

"At 77 FOODS, our scientists are inspired by nature to mimic this
extracellular matrix -- using only ingredients coming from plants, we
encapsulate plant oils such as sunflower oil, canola oil, etc. Thanks to
this innovation, it is possible to make a plant-based adipose tissue
that closely resembles that of meat, that can be sliced, cooked, and
slowly releases oil upon cooking" comments Nicolas Schweitzer, CEO and
Co-Founder of 77 FOODS.

**Eighth Day Foods** (Unilever Innovation Challenge Finalist)

"Eighth Day Foods has developed a unique precision preparation of the
sweet lupins and a unique accelerated traditional fermentation
methodology. This innovation has led to retaining the full nutritional
value and functional qualities that are in complete lupins; dramatically
improving sensory properties and imparting an end-product with optimum
taste, mouthfeel, aroma and juiciness" details Roger Drew, Co-Founder of
Eighth Day Foods.

**ProPlant Foods** (Unilever Innovation Challenge Finalist)

"ProPlant Foods is a clean label company that offers a healthy, tasty,
and economical plant-based chicken with much higher protein content,
amazing texture and rich, delicious mouthfeel. We are on a mission to
bring about a mammoth change in the way people consume proteins" notes
Pranjuli Garg, Co-Founder of ProPlant Foods.

**Mushlabs** (Live Cooking Demonstration: Step Up to the Plate)

"Mushlabs' fermentation platform allows us to unlock the potential of an
overlooked kingdom of life -- fungi -- as a biological powerhouse that
can restore circularity to our broken food system. We are dedicated to
building solutions that change the way we consume food, by producing
food that is good to our senses, our bodies and our planet," shares
Mazen Risk, Founder and CEO of Mushlabs.

**Sophie's Bionutrients** (Live Cooking Demonstration: Step Up to the
Plate)

"Sophie's Bionutrients' new patented Sustainable Urban Protein
technologies use proprietary strains of microbes and precision
fermentation technologies to upcycle industrial food waste and grow food
grade protein with little space, energy, water, and time. This
technology can be deployed in any metropolitan areas to provide
essential nutrients and create circular economies," details Eugene Wang,
Co-Founder and CEO of Sophie's Bionutrients.

**Shandi Global** (Live Cooking Demonstration: Step Up to the Plate)

"Shandi Global is adopting the latest health and food science principles
to develop meat alternatives which are second to none: naturality,
incorporating social responsibilities and product versatility that
exceeds customer expectations," shares Reena Sharma, Co-Founder and CEO
of Shandi Global.

**Cell Based Proteins**

**Hoxton Farms** (Start-Up Arena)

"At Hoxton Farms, we want to bring back fat. Fat is the secret
ingredient that defines how meat looks, cooks and tastes. By simulating
the entire cultivation process computationally -- from biopsy to bacon
-- our technology allows us to customize fat for any application.
Cultivated fat is the healthy hero ingredient that will finally unlock
realistic meat alternatives," explains Max Jamilly, Co-Founder of Hoxton
Farms.

**Tiamat Sciences** (Start-Up Arena)

"Tiamat Sciences can manufacture a wide range of high-value proteins for
a fraction of their current cost, thanks to our proprietary PlanTech
platform. The choices we are making on how we will eat tomorrow will
shape the future of the generations ahead. We must rethink the way we
produce food as well as the science behind it. The cellular agriculture
movement is addressing the challenges to come, and we are proud to be a
part of the revolution," affirms France Emmanuelle Adil, Founder and CEO
of Tiamat Sciences.

**BIOMILQ** (TechHub Virtual Booth)

"BIOMILQ aims to increase infant feeding options for new parents by
offering human milk produced outside the body as supplemental
nutrition," shares Michelle Egger, Co-Founder and CEO of BIOMILQ.

**Ingredient Innovation**

**Kernel Mycofood** (TechHub Virtual Booth)

"Kernel Mycofood is solving the absence of a properly sustainable and
cost-effective protein ingredient that is flavor neutral. The result is
a market-ready product that better-suits the needs of a range of food
manufacturers, reducing the amount of post processing needed for an end
product," details Horacio Acerbo, CEO of Kernel Mycofood.

**The Protein Brewery** (Start-Up Arena)

"The Protein Brewery's production technology comprises a unique
combination of proprietary micro-organisms (fungi) and an
easy-to-operate brewing process. Feeding a growing population in a
nutritious and sustainable way is a challenge, we need to change the way
we produce food. One of the answers is more yield per hectare, but
locally grown and with a minimal footprint," notes Wim de Laat, Founder
of The Protein Brewery.

**Shiru** (Start-Up Arena)

"Shiru identifies and creates the most functional, natural proteins
specifically tailored to certain food applications, catapulting the
development of more sustainable, nutritious, and delicious foods. Shiru
is a B2B company, partnering with food CPG, ingredients, and ag
companies to bring the best protein ingredients to market," explains
Jasmin Hume, Founder and CEO of Shiru.

**Food Waste**

**PolyNatural** (TechHub Virtual Booth)

"PolyNatural's first development in Shel-Life reduces dehydration and
microbial contamination forming a second peel in the fruit coated, using
just natural (plant-based) and certified organic ingredients. Since
fresh fruit is a perishable product it is necessary to extend their
shelf life during post-harvest," shares Francisco Palma, Founder of
PolyNatural.

**Clean Crop Technologies** (TechHub Virtual Booth)

"Clean Crop combines air and electricity to remove contaminants from
food, extending shelf life and improving safety across the food space.
Our proprietary system is optimized to decontaminate with no change to
quality in high sensitivity foods, including nuts, dairy, and meats,
using a fraction of the energy required for peer solutions," details Dan
White, Co-Founder and CEO of Clean Crop Technologies

**Supply Chain**

**Food Portal** (TechHub Virtual Booth)

"We're making industry-specific software accessible to every food
company to support the entire supply chain. There's the potential to
both improve systematic capability at site-level and bring unity to the
way assurance information is transmitted between companies" explains
Duncan Lacey, Director of Innovation of Food Portal.

Many more game-changing early and mid-stage companies will join the
virtual Future Food-Tech Summit on March 11-12, which will bring
together food brands, retailers, ingredient manufacturers, technology
providers and investors for two days of high impact online networking
and knowledge-exchange.

The full program, speaking faculty and delegate registration are
available now at
[www.futurefoodtechsf.com](http://www.futurefoodtechsf.com)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

To arrange interviews with any of the featured start-ups, or to apply
for a press-pass to cover the summit, please contact Laura Hodgkiss on
<laura.hodgkiss@rethinkevents.com> / +44 (0)1273 789989

**Note to Editors:**\
Future Food-Tech takes place three times a year in San Francisco, New
York and London, plus also in Singapore as part of the Asia-Pacific
Agri-Food Innovation Week. At present the summits are being held
virtually to keep the industry connected as we emerge from the COVID-19
pandemic. The summits generate valuable opportunities for networking,
knowledge exchange and deal-making among its international delegation of
food businesses, retailers, technology providers, entrepreneurs and
investors. <https://futurefoodtech.com/>

 
