---
title: "All You Can Eat, Just Order the Meat"
date: 2021-11-03 08:55:00
lastmod: 2021-11-03 08:55:00
slug: all-you-can-eat-just-order-meat
description: "This essay is first-place winner of the Student Essay Contest 2021. Eva Koffeman graduated from the University of Amsterdam in August 2021 with an MBA in Consumer Marketing."
excerpt: "This essay is first-place winner of the Student Essay Contest 2021. Eva Koffeman graduated from the University of Amsterdam in August 2021 with an MBA in Consumer Marketing."
proteins: [Animal]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Business, Culture, Policy]
regions: [Europe, International]
flags: [NA]
essay_contest: [First Place]
contributors: [9832]
images: ["eva_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "eva_0.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 6000
uuid: 9831
---
***This essay is first-place winner of the [Student Essay Contest
2021](https://www.proteinreport.org/student-essay-contest-2021). Eva
Koffeman graduated from the University of Amsterdam in August 2021 with
an MBA in Consumer Marketing.***

Less meat, less heat. It is becoming increasingly recognized and proven
that a reduction of meat consumption would be extremely beneficial to
the climate, food security, animal welfare, the environment,
biodiversity, and global health. Notwithstanding these essential
advantages, meat retains its substantial share in contemporary Western
diets. The average Dutch person consumes meat 6 days a week (RIVM,
2020). The persistence of this habit can be explained by the fact that
people believe eating meat is natural, normal, necessary and nice
(Piazza et al., 2015). Even though vegetarianism has gradually become
more popular and accepted (Leitzmann, 2014), meat consumption remains
the social norm. At the majority of organized dinners and events, meat
is the default menu option. In most cases, vegetarians are asked to
indicate their preferences for an alternative plant-based menu in
advance, so that the organizers can make sure vegetarian options will be
served at the occasion, too. This procedure can influence the choices
that people make, as people have a tendency to stick with the given
default option (Dinner, Johnson & Goldstein, 2011). In order to reduce
meat consumption, Dutch senator prof Henriette Prast proposed to reverse
this common default by making plant based meals the default option at
organized dinners, and enabling meat- or fish lovers to request a
non-vegetarian alternative dish in case they so desire (e.g. Prast,
2009). When this design was tested in a scientific experiment, it led
much more people to eat vegetarian at the occasion than when the default
menu contained meat and dairy (Hansen, Schilling & Malthesen, 2019).
Given the societal importance of this finding, scientific replications
of the effect are crucial. Yet insight in these mechanisms could be part
of the solution to make meat more obsolete.

*Default effects*

The default effect refers to "the tendency to stick with the option that
takes effect if one does not make an explicit choice" (Li & Chapman,
2013). A considerable quantity of scientific studies has been conducted
on this effect. For example, there is a substantial body of research
comparing opt-in and opt-out organ donation systems. The results are
consistent: opt-out systems lead to much more organ donors than opt-in
systems (e.g. Davidai, Gilovich & Ross, 2012; Johnson & Goldstein, 2003;
McKenzie, Liersch & Finkelstein, 2006). Other examples of areas in which
default effects have been investigated are retirement program designs
(Madrian & Shea, 2001) and lighting product choices (Dinner, Johnson &
Goldstein, 2011). The participants in these studies were shown to opt
for the default significantly more often than for the alternative
option. Similar effects have been found in the context of food
consumption, which has important societal implications as the use of
vegan defaults has the potential to significantly reduce meat and dairy
consumption.

The default effect is an example of irrational decision-making, as it
illustrates a situation in which people do not decide according to their
own best interest but are rather affected by a somewhat arbitrary
external stimulus -- the default. One potential explanation for this
effect is that when people are faced with too many decisions, they tend
to rely on simple heuristics to make their decision (Herman et al.,
2009).

Several studies have examined various specific heuristics that may
explain the default effect. People may perceive defaults as
recommendations or suggestions from the policymakers or organization
that set them. This impression has also been referred to as *implied
endorsement* (McKenzie et al., 2006). In addition, sticking with the
default requires less effort for the decision maker (Samuelson &
Zeckhauser, 1988). After all, it prevents the individual from having to
evaluate the available options. Finally, default options can influence
perceived social norms, as Everett et al. (2015) found that defaults are
perceived as socially normative options.

*Effort*

Individuals have to make approximately 200 food choices each day (Novak
& Brownell, 2011). We have to decide *when* we eat, *where* we eat,
*what* we eat, and *how much* we eat. An overburden of decisions leads
people to simplify the decision-making process. Therefore, it seems
likely that a default menu option offers a tempting choice, as it
exempts people from having to decide. Especially if participants feel
like it is too much effort to switch to the alternative menu option, a
significant proportion of them will stick with the default menu option
regardless of the ingredients of this menu, as it discards the need for
option evaluation. Results will likely not apply to participants with
strong preferences such as vegans or meat lovers, defaults are unlikely
to be influential for people with strong preexisting attitudes (Vetter &
Kutzner, 2016). Nevertheless, it is expected that overall the default
effect should be stronger when the effort required to switch to the
alternative menu option is high.

The importance of effort in food contexts has also been illustrated by
the "proximity effect", which refers to the finding that placing
snack-food further away from individuals decreases their consumption of
that food (Maas, de Ridder, de Vet & de Wit, 2012). The healthy option
should be easier to obtain than the unhealthy option.

*Social norms*

Another reason for the appeal of default options is that people may
interpret the default as an indication of what others choose. This
suggests that in my experiment, the default menu option will be
perceived as more socially normative than the non-default menu option.

The influence of social norms on food choice was also pointed out by
Mollen, Rimal, Ruiter & Kok (2013), who found that meal choice is
susceptible to printed social norm messages. The experiment looked at
two types of social norms: *descriptive norms* and *injunctive norms*.
Descriptive norms refer to the behavior that we observe among most
others in our environment, whereas injunctive norms concern the behavior
we believe is approved or disapproved of by others (Cialdini, Reno,
Kallgren, 1990). Mollen et al. (2013) found that in an on-campus food
court, a poster describing a healthy descriptive norm positively
predicted healthy food choices. When the poster read a healthy
injunctive norm, it did not significantly improve food choices. In line
with these findings, it has been proposed that injunctive norms are less
important in quick food decisions

Christie & Chen (2018) found that people have a tendency to order dishes
that other people choose as well. Interestingly, this study looked
specifically at vegetarian and non-vegetarian lunch options. The results
showed that participants frequently mimicked the order placed by the
person ahead of them in line, regardless of whether this person ordered
a vegetarian or a non-vegetarian meal. The participants conformed to the
norm they observed in front of them.  Choosing a plant based menu will
then no longer deviate from the social norm. Therefore, it is expected
that the default being perceived as socially normative will subsequently
increase the likelihood of that food option being chosen.

*Current study*

My experiment was centered around the following research question: "What
is the effect of having non-vegetarian compared to plant based meals as
the default menu option at organized dinners on meat consumption, and
how can this effect be explained?". It bridged a gap in the literature
by contributing empirical findings concerning causes of default effects
in food contexts in three ways. It replicates default effects in food
choice, provides a causal test of the role of effort in default effects
on food choice, and tests the role of social norms in this process. In
addition to this scientific value, this specific research area also has
societal relevance as it provides empirical evidence on a potential
strategy to stimulate the necessary reduction of meat consumption.

**Methods**

*Participants*

The participants were recruited from an online test panel of over 65,000
members who voluntarily subscribed to the panel to share their personal
experiences, opinions and judgments about products and services. A total
of 23,565 people participated in the experiment that was completed
online (52.1% female). Age was provided as a categorical variable
ranging from 'younger than 18' to 'older than 66', with intervals of 10
years. More than three quarters of the participants was 56 or older
(76.1%). The mode age category was 'older than 66'. Almost half of the
sample was employed (48.5%), whereas 37.1% was retired and 14.4% was
unemployed.

*Experimental Manipulation*

The experiment had a 2 (default: meat vs. vegetarian) by 2 (effort: high
vs. low) full-factorial between-subject design. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of these four conditions. In all conditions,
participants were asked to imagine the same scenario. They would receive
an e-mail from a current or former employer which included an invitation
to an annual staff dinner at which the company's performance throughout
the past year would be reviewed, and the 40th anniversary of the company
would be celebrated. In order to make sure retired participants would
feel included too, the email invited former colleagues to the event as
well. The part of the e-mail text including information about the date,
location and program of the evening was identical across conditions. The
e-mails differed between conditions in two aspects. First of all, each
email announced a default menu option, which, depending on the condition
the participant was in, was either a meat menu (*meat default*
condition) or a vegetarian menu (*vegetarian default* condition).
Everyone at the dinner would be served the same menu, except for the
attendees that would indicate beforehand to prefer the alternative menu
instead. Second, the invitations also varied with respect to the amount
of effort required to switch to the alternative menu option. In the *low
effort* condition, participants could request the alternative menu by
merely clicking a link in the email. In the *high effort* condition, the
email asked them to visit the company's website, look for a form under
the heading 'staff dinner', and to fill it out and submit it.

**Findings**

Overall, a significant main effect of default menu option was found,
such that participants showed a tendency to stick with the default menu
option regardless of what the default was. Presenting participants with
a vegetarian default menu increased vegetarian choice from 21% to 52%
compared to a meat default condition. This effect was partially mediated
by descriptive social norms: the default menu option was perceived as
being more popular than the alternative menu option, which led
participants to opt for the default menu option themselves significantly
more often.

The main effect found was consistent with previous literature on default
effects (e.g. Johnson & Goldstein 2003; McKenzie, Liersch & Finkelstein
2006, Dinner, Johnson & Goldstein, 2011), as the default option was
chosen significantly more often than the alternative option. Thereby,
the findings confirm the existence of a default effect in food choice.
The outcome indicates that a vegetarian default menu option provides an
effective way to reduce meat consumption at organized dinners. It more
than doubled the number of participants opting for the vegetarian menu.
This suggests that practitioners can stimulate healthy and sustainable
food choices merely by serving meat on request rather than by default.
Introducing the vegetarian default menu in organizations would enable
the implementation of this policy at a large scale. Depending on the
dissemination of this measure, this could lead to a drastic reduction of
meat consumption.

In fact, the current sample showed a tendency to stick with the default
option when it was easy to request the alternative menu option, and to
request the alternative option when it required a lot of effort.
Perceived descriptive social norms mediated the relationship between
default menu option and menu choice, whereas perceived injunctive social
norms did not. This means that participants thought the default menu
option would be chosen more frequently by others than the alternative
menu option, which subsequently led participants to opt for the default
themselves as well.

**Conclusion**

Because a reduction of meat consumption would be beneficial to a variety
of areas such as global health and sustainability (Godfray et al.,
2018), the current study investigated whether offering vegetarian menus
by default at organized dinners could discourage people from choosing to
eat meat. In an online experiment among 23,565 participants, a
vegetarian default menu option increased the vegetarian choice from 21%
to 52%. This effect of default menu option on food choice was partially
mediated by descriptive social norms. Participants felt like the default
menu option was chosen more often by others than the alternative menu
option, which led them to opt for the default menu themselves too. The
role of the effort of switching to the alternative option may be
surprising and requires further investigation. In sum, these data
suggest that offering a vegetarian instead of meat default menu option
may be an effective and easy to implement way to reduce meat consumption
at organized dinners.

**References**

Christie, C. D., & Chen, F. S. (2018). Vegetarian or meat? Food choice
modeling of main dishes occurs outside of awareness. *Appetite*, 121,
50-54.

Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory
of normative conduct: recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering
in public places*. Journal of personality and social psychology*, 58(6),
1015.

Davidai, S., Gilovich, T., & Ross, L. D. (2012). The meaning of default
options for potential organ donors. *Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences*, 109(38), 15201-15205.

Dinner, I., Johnson, E. J., Goldstein, D. G., & Liu, K. (2011).
Partitioning default effects: why people choose not to choose. *Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied*, *17*(4), 332.

Doelman, J. C., Stehfest, E., Tabeau, A., & van Meijl, H. (2019). Making
the Paris agreement climate targets consistent with food security
objectives. *Global Food Security*, 23, 93-103.

Everett, J. A., Caviola, L., Kahane, G., Savulescu, J., & Faber, N. S.
(2015). Doing good by doing nothing? The role of social norms in
explaining default effects in altruistic contexts. *European Journal of
Social Psychology*, 45(2), 230-241.

Godfray, H. C. J., Aveyard, P., Garnett, T., Hall, J. W., Key, T. J.,
Lorimer, J., \... & Jebb, S. A. (2018). Meat consumption, health, and
the environment. *Science*, 361.

Hansen, P. G., Schilling, M., & Malthesen, M. S. (2019). Nudging healthy
and sustainable food choices: three randomized controlled field
experiments using a vegetarian lunch-default as a normative signal.
*Journal of Public Health*, 1-6.

Herman, C. P., Roth, D. A., & Polivy, J. (2003). Effects of the presence
of others on food intake: a normative interpretation. *Psychological
bulletin*, *129*(6), 873.

Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. (2003). Do defaults save lives?.
*Science*, 302 (5649), 1338-39.

Lally, P., Bartle, N., & Wardle, J. (2011). Social norms and diet in
adolescents. *Appetite*, 57(3), 623-627.

Leitzmann, C. (2014). Vegetarian nutrition: past, present, future. *The
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition*, *100*, 496-502.

Li, M., & Chapman, G. B. (2013). Nudge to health: Harnessing decision
research to promote health behavior. *Social and Personality Psychology
Compass*, 7(3), 188.

Maas, J., de Ridder, D. T., de Vet, E., & De Wit, J. B. (2012). Do
distant foods decrease intake? The effect of food accessibility on
consumption. *Psychology & Health*, *27*(sup2), 59-73.

Machovina, B., Feeley, K. J., & Ripple, W. J. (2015). Biodiversity
conservation: The key is reducing meat consumption. *Science of the
Total Environment*, 536, 419-431.

Madrian, B. C., & Shea, D. F. (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia
in 401 (k) participation and savings behavior. *The Quarterly Journal of
Economics*, *116*(4), 1149-1187.

McKenzie, C. R., Liersch, M. J., & Finkelstein, S. R. (2006).
Recommendations implicit in policy defaults. *Psychological Science*,
17(5), 414-420.

Mollen, S., Rimal, R. N., Ruiter, R. A., & Kok, G. (2013). Healthy and
unhealthy social norms and food selection. Findings from a
field-experiment. *Appetite*, *65*, 83-89.

Novak, N., & D Brownell, K. (2011). Taxation as prevention and as a
treatment for obesity: the case of sugar-sweetened beverages. *Current
pharmaceutical design*, 17(12), 1218.

Piazza, J., Ruby, M. B., Loughnan, S., Luong, M., Kulik, J., Watkins, H.
M., & Seigerman, M. (2015). Rationalizing meat consumption. The 4Ns.
*Appetite*, 91, 114-128.

Prast, H. (2009, October 29). "Vegetarisme moet de sociale norm worden,
de vleeseter de uitzondering" Me Judice. Retrieved from
[](https://www.mejudice.nl/artikelen/detail/vegetarisme-moet-de-sociale-norm-worden-de-vleeseter-de-uitzondering)
<https://www.mejudice.nl/artikelen/detail/vegetarisme-moet-de-sociale-norm-worden-de-vleeseter-de-uitzondering>

RIVM. (2020). Consumptie van vlees in Nederland. *Rijksinstituut voor
Volksgezondheid en Milieu*.
<https://www.rivm.nl/sites/default/files/2020-01/011834_FS%20Consumptie%20van%20vlees%20in%20NL_TG.pdf>

Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. (1988). Status quo bias in decision
making. *Journal of risk and uncertainty*, 1(1), 7-59.

Vetter, M., & Kutzner, F. (2016). Nudge me if you can-how defaults and
attitude strength interact to change behavior. *Comprehensive Results in
Social Psychology*, *1*(1-3), 8-34.

 

**Appendix A** 

*Text of the stimulus emails used in the online experiment*

 

 

Dear colleagues, 

We are pleased to invite you to the annual staff dinner that will be
held on June 15 at 7 pm in the orangery of restaurant De Posthoorn in
Vriezenveen. As always, we will review our company's performance
throughout the past year while sharing a delicious meal. Our director
will give a short presentation, after which there will be an opportunity
to ask questions. Because this year also marks our 40th anniversary, we
warmly welcome both current and former colleagues to celebrate with us.
  

\[Condition-specific text; see Table A1.\] 

We hope that everyone (both current and former employees) will be
present in large numbers. Keep in mind that we would like to eat outside
if weather permits, so bring a jacket! 

Parking is free but because of the limited parking space, carpooling
with colleagues is appreciated. The location is also easily accessible
by public transport. A bus stops outside the door and takes you to the
station in five minutes. 

Unless you let us know otherwise, we assume to see you there. We look
forward to the evening!  

Sincerely,

The events committee

 

 

 

*Table A1*. Condition-specific text in stimulus email

 

**Condition**

 

**Text**

1.     Meat default menu + low effort of choosing the alternative option

During the meal, a meat menu will be served for everybody attending. If
you prefer a vegetarian menu, we will gladly take this into account. In
that case, the only thing you need to do is click the link below. Your
answer will be recorded automatically.

 

I would like a vegetarian menu

 

2.     Meat default menu + high effort of choosing the alternative
option

During the meal, a meat menu will be served for everybody attending. If
you prefer a vegetarian menu, we will gladly take this into account. In
that case, we ask you to go to our website. Under the heading 'staff
dinner', you will find a form that you can fill out and submit.

 

3.     Vegetarian default menu + low effort of choosing the alternative
option

During the meal, a vegetarian menu will be served for everybody
attending. If you prefer a meat menu, we will gladly take this into
account. In that case, the only thing you need to do is click the link
below. Your answer will be recorded automatically.

 

I would like a meat menu

 

4.     Vegetarian default menu + high effort of choosing the alternative
option

During the meal, a vegetarian menu will be served for everybody
attending. If you prefer a meat menu, we will gladly take this into
account. In that case, we ask you to go to our website. Under the
heading 'staff dinner', you will find a form that you can fill out and
submit.

 

 

 

 

**Appendix B**

*Full questionnaire used in the online experiment* ** **

(Dependent variable measure) The email spoke about a default menu and an
alternative menu. Think about how you would have reacted to this e-mail
in real life. Which menu would you have had at the event?

o   The default menu

o   The alternative menu

 

(Distracting item) Do you think it is important that people are asked
for their dietary wishes in invitation emails?

o   Yes

o   No

 

(Dietary pattern measure) On how many days did you eat meat in an
average week over the last month? Think about breakfast, lunch, dinner
and snacks.

o   0

o   1

o   2

o   3

o   4

o   5

o   6

o   7

 

(Dietary pattern measure) Which description best suits your dietary
pattern?

o   Meat- and fish eater

o   Meat eater (no fish)

o   Fish eater (no meat)

o   Flexitarian (mostly vegetarian)

o   Vegetarian (no meat nor fish)

o   Flexi-vegan (mostly vegan)

o   Vegan (no animal products at all)

 

(Distracting item) The email read that carpooling is appreciated due to
the limited parking space. In the given situation, which type of
transport would you likely use to go to the dinner?

o   By car with colleagues

o   By car on my own

o   Public transport

o   Something else

 

(Distracting item) The email said that the organization assumes you will
attend the dinner unless you let them know otherwise. Do you think this
is a pleasant way of being invited?

o   Yes, it is fine that my presence is assumed

o   No, I would rather be asked to sign up explicitly

o   I don't care

 

(Manipulation check default menu) Without scrolling back, do you
remember what will be the default menu at the event?

o   A meat menu

o   A vegetarian menu

o   A gluten free menu

o   An organic menu

o   I don't know

 

(Manipulation check alternative menu) Without scrolling back, do you
remember what alternative menu option you were offered?

o   A meat menu

o   A vegetarian menu

o   A gluten free menu

o   An organic menu

o   I don't know

o   None

 

(Manipulation check effort) What did you think of the way the
alternative option could be requested?

o   Hard

o   Complicated

o   Easy to do

o   I don't know

 

(Distracting item) The email invited former colleagues as well. How
welcome do you think former employees were at the event, in comparison
to current colleagues?

o   Less welcome than current colleagues

o   Equally welcome as current colleagues

o   More welcome than current colleagues

 

(Descriptive social norms) Of all the people taking part in this
questionnaire, what proportion do you think will choose to have the
vegetarian menu at this event?

\[Enter a number between 0 and 100\]

** **

To what extent do you agree with the following statements?

 

(Distracting item) "It is good that former employees are invited to this
dinner too"

(strongly disagree \| disagree \| somewhat disagree \| neutral \|
somewhat agree \| agree \| strongly agree)

 

(Manipulation check effort) "Switching to the alternative menu option
required a lot of effort"

(strongly disagree \| disagree \| somewhat disagree \| neutral \|
somewhat agree \| agree \| strongly agree)

 

(Engagement measure) "It was easy for me to imagine the given situation
in the email"

(strongly disagree \| disagree \| somewhat disagree \| neutral \|
somewhat agree \| agree \| strongly agree)

 

(Injunctive social norms) "Most people believe that others should eat
vegetarian at this event"

(strongly disagree \| disagree \| somewhat disagree \| neutral \|
somewhat agree \| agree \| strongly agree)

 
