---
title: BLUU Seafood raises EUR 16 million in Series A funding to bring
  cultivated fish to market
date: 2023-06-28 13:20:23
lastmod: 2023-06-28 13:20:23
slug: bluu-seafood-raises-eur-16-million-series-funding-bring-cultivated-fish-market
company: 7856
description: BLUU Seafood, the leading European food biotech company to produce
  cultivated fish, continues its growth path and successfully closes its Series
  A. By raising EUR 16 million, the German start-up secures the necessary
  capital to further advance the work on their groundbreaking technology and the
  market launch of first products.
excerpt: BLUU Seafood, the leading European food biotech company to produce
  cultivated fish, continues its growth path and successfully closes its Series
  A. By raising EUR 16 million, the German start-up secures the necessary
  capital to further advance the work on their groundbreaking technology and the
  market launch of first products.
proteins:
  - Cell-Based
products:
  - Seafood
topics:
  - Business
regions:
  - Europe
flags:
  - Press Release
  - Investments
directory:
  - 234
  - 5831
  - 7679
  - 7856
featured_image: Atlantic salmon in Petri dish_copyright_Bluu GmbH 2023_photo_Anna Brauns.jpg
featured_image_caption: Atlantic salmon in Petri dish. Copyright Bluu GmbH 2023. Photo Anna Brauns.
additional_images:
  - src: BLUU’s cultivated fish balls made from trout cells_copyright_Bluu GmbH
      2023_photo_Anna Brauns.jpg
    caption: BLUU’s cultivated fish balls made from trout cells. Copyright Bluu GmbH
      2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
    alt: BLUU’s cultivated fish balls made from trout cells. Copyright Bluu GmbH
      2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
    title: BLUU’s cultivated fish balls made from trout cells. Copyright Bluu GmbH
      2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
  - src: BLUU’s cultivated fish fingers made from trout cells_copyright_Bluu GmbH
      2023_photo_Anna Brauns.jpg
    caption: BLUU’s cultivated fish fingers made from trout cells._Copyright Bluu
      GmbH 2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
    alt: BLUU’s cultivated fish fingers made from trout cells._Copyright Bluu GmbH
      2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
    title: BLUU’s cultivated fish fingers made from trout cells._Copyright Bluu GmbH
      2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
  - src: Characterization of isolated primary fish cells.jpg
    caption: Characterization of isolated primary fish cells with targeted
      biomarkers. Copyright Bluu GmbH 2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
    alt: Characterization of isolated primary fish cells with targeted biomarkers.
      Copyright Bluu GmbH 2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
    title: Characterization of isolated primary fish cells with targeted biomarkers.
      Copyright Bluu GmbH 2023. Photo by Anna Brauns.
images:
  - Atlantic salmon in Petri dish_copyright_Bluu GmbH 2023_photo_Anna Brauns.jpg
  - BLUU’s cultivated fish balls made from trout cells_copyright_Bluu GmbH
    2023_photo_Anna Brauns.jpg
  - BLUU’s cultivated fish fingers made from trout cells_copyright_Bluu GmbH
    2023_photo_Anna Brauns.jpg
  - Characterization of isolated primary fish cells.jpg
draft: false
uuid: 11336
---
**Berlin, 28/06/2023.** BLUU Seafood, the leading European food biotech
company to produce cultivated fish, continues its growth path and
successfully closes its Series A. By raising EUR 16 million, the German
start-up secures the necessary capital to further advance the work on
their groundbreaking technology and the market launch of first products.
Cultivated fish is real animal protein directly grown from fish cells
without killing the animal.

The Series A funding was led by Sparkfood, a subsidiary of Sonae, and by
LBBW VC. Sparkfood, an investor and operator in innovative food
companies across Europe, is an excellent fit with the existing
outstanding international food and impact investors. Further
participants in the round were Asian investor SeaX Ventures and other
renowned VCs such as Manta Ray Ventures, Norrsken VC, Delivery Hero
Ventures, Innovationsstarter Fonds Hamburg GmbH, and Dr. Oetker. In
total, BLUU Seafood has raised more than EUR 23 million since its
founding three years ago.

With the fresh money, the company will focus primarily on the regulatory
approval of its first products, in addition to expanding its research
work and initiating pilot production. The main focus will be on hybrid
products such as fish balls and fish fingers made from cultivated fish
cells, the same as the ones presented in the summer of 2022. The
start-up plans its market entry in Singapore, where the sale of
cultivated chicken has already been approved by regulators in 2020,
making it the ideal launch pad for BLUU's cultivated fish, which the
company expects to get approved by 2024.

In the US, cultivated meat and fish are also about to be launched into
the market after recent USDA and FDA approvals for cultivated protein
start-ups GOOD Meat and UPSIDE Foods. With the final approval of the US
Department of Agriculture granted a few days ago, the sale is now
officially allowed. BLUU Seafood, too, has initiated the approval
process with the FDA. Europe will be the next to follow. The company is
currently preparing to open its pilot production plant with construction
work expected to be completed by autumn this year. With this plant, BLUU
Seafood will leave lab scale and reach another important milestone by
scaling up production into larger fermenters of up to 500 liters.

*Dr. Sebastian Rakers, Co-Founder and CEO of BLUU Seafood:*

\"On the one hand, our highly successful Series-A demonstrates the
enormous future potential that lies in cultivated fish as a platform
technology for sustainable animal protein. On the other hand, it also
underlines the strong scientific development that BLUU Seafood and our
excellent team have delivered so far. Together with our strong,
international investor base, we can start the next stage of development
and bring our first products to market.\"

*Simon Fabich, Co-Founder of BLUU Seafood:*

\"The momentum in the market is huge, exemplified by the recent
regulatory approvals for cultivated food in the US. I am very excited
about the upcoming launch of first cultivated products into the American
market. Our vision is becoming reality. More and more, forward-looking
investors have come to realize this, and the flow of capital will
increase massively. BLUU Seafood, too, will continue to raise funds and
help lead this revolution as a European player.\"

*Anouk Veber, Head of Ventures at Sparkfood:*

\"The future of human nutrition lies in healthier and sustainable
alternatives to conventional food production. At Sparkfood, we focus on
disruptive innovations in the food sector that preserve the environment
while being scalable enough to make a relevant contribution to feeding
the growing world population. BLUU Seafood has provided proof-of-concept
for this. We are excited and proud to support the great team at BLUU
Seafood in bringing this to market.\"

*Andreas von Richter, Managing Director of LBBW VC:*

\"Our vision is to shape a resilient future that is based on targeted
investments in startups, which significantly and sustainably improve our
carbon footprint. In this regard, groundbreaking technologies play a
crucial role. In particular, the cell cultivation of proteins represents
a key innovation. BLUU Seafood proves to be a real pioneer in this area,
and we are delighted to support this German success story and jointly
tread the path into a sustainable future.\"

**About BLUU Seafood**

The food biotech BLUU Seafood is the first company in Europe to
specialize in the commercial production of cultivated fish. As a pioneer
at the interface between cell and food technology, BLUU Seafood is
stepping up to produce healthy, sustainable and at the same time
delicious fish products from cell cultures. The aim is to produce fish
without animal suffering, in a cost-efficient way, thus making a
significant contribution to climate and species protection. The
start-up, based in Berlin with scientific facilities in Lübeck, was
founded in 2020 by Dr Sebastian Rakers and Simon Fabich with a team of
experts including marine and cell biologists, tissue and food engineers.
Molecular biologist Dr. Christian Dammann serves as Chief Operating
Officer. In research & development, BLUU Seafood cooperates with the
Fraunhofer Research Institution for Marine Biotechnology and Cell
Engineering (EMB; now Fraunhofer IMTE) in Lübeck. 32 employees from 13
different nations work for the food biotech. More information at
[www.bluu.bio](http://www.bluu.bio)
