---
title: "12 Start-Ups Applying New Innovative Approaches to Transform the Future of Food"
date: 2020-10-26 13:34:29
lastmod: 2020-10-26 13:34:29
slug: 12-start-ups-applying-new-innovative-approaches-transform-future-food
company_name: "Future Food-Tech"
company_link: "https://futurefoodtechnyc.com/"
description: "The food industry is quickly adapting to today’s consumer demands, developing new technologies and bringing products to market faster than ever before. New start-ups are emerging on the food-tech scene with bold new concepts and fresh approaches to transform the future of food. It’s more important than ever for the Future Food-Tech summit to showcase fresh talent ripe for investment and partnerships, as the industry gathers once again on December 2-3, 2020. With a proven track-record for scouting the most exciting and freshest technologies, the summit unveils twelve innovators offering unique approaches to meet the industry’s hottest challenges."
excerpt: "The food industry is quickly adapting to today’s consumer demands, developing new technologies and bringing products to market faster than ever before. New start-ups are emerging on the food-tech scene with bold new concepts and fresh approaches to transform the future of food. It’s more important than ever for the Future Food-Tech summit to showcase fresh talent ripe for investment and partnerships, as the industry gathers once again on December 2-3, 2020. With a proven track-record for scouting the most exciting and freshest technologies, the summit unveils twelve innovators offering unique approaches to meet the industry’s hottest challenges."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial]
products: [Meat, Dairy]
topics: [Business, Sci-Tech]
regions: [International]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [1172, 7349]
images: ["fft ecosystem.jpg","fft_0.png"]
featured_image: "fft ecosystem.jpg"
additional_images:
  - src: "fft_0.png"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 7870
---
**Future Food-Tech presents revolutionary solutions set to shake-up the
food industry**

The food industry is quickly adapting to today's consumer demands,
developing new technologies and bringing products to market faster than
ever before. New start-ups are emerging on the food-tech scene with bold
new concepts and fresh approaches to transform the future of food.

It's more important than ever for the Future Food-Tech summit to
showcase fresh talent ripe for investment and partnerships, as the
industry gathers once again on December 2-3, 2020.

"There has never been a greater need for new technologies to accelerate
the future of food. We are excited to unveil the standout solutions that
are spearheading the next generation of food-tech innovation at the
summit this December," says Jet Luckhurst, Technology Scout at Future
Food-Tech.

With a proven track-record for scouting the most exciting and freshest
technologies, the summit unveils twelve innovators offering unique
approaches to meet the industry's hottest challenges.

**PRIORITIZING HEALTH AND NUTRITION**

**CHALLENGE: Accelerate cell-based products to market**

[Orbillion Bio](https://www.orbillion.com/) is building an advanced
bioplatform for functional testing of cell lines for cultivated meat --
a solution that is ready for rapid scalability and wide-spread adoption.
"Our mission is to bring healthy, ethical, and flavorful cultivated meat
with a story to the modern consumer," explains Patricia Bubner, CEO and
Co-Founder at [Orbillion Bio](https://www.orbillion.com/).

**CHALLENGE:** More natural, functional ingredients for clean label
products

"Consumers want real foods made with real food ingredients, not
synthetic additives," states Chris Gregson, Founder at [Pargon
Pure](http://paragonpure.com/). By working *with* nature to enhance the
nutrition, sustainability and authenticity of packaged foods, Paragon
Pure creates high-performance specialty flours by guiding traditional
grain sprouting processes towards precise functional properties. Its
flours can be used to replace additives and deliver natural flavors,
colors and nutrients into wholesome foods.

**CHALLENGE:** **Natural healthy ingredients from upcycled agri-food
waste**

Tait Labs produces sustainable food and pharma ingredients upcycled from
natural sources by unlocking the health potential trapped in the 4
million tons of mandarin orange peel produced annually. "We are ready to
share our vision of how it tackles the two massive problems of food
waste and chronic disease," says Andrew Tait, CEO of [Tait
Labs](https://herring-eagle-mm93.squarespace.com/).

**NEXTGEN PLANT-BASED**

**CHALLENGE:** **Recreate the texture and mouthfeel of whole-cut
plant-based meats**

Bevo is a food-technology company that has developed a process and
designed a proprietary machine that can transform any plant-based
protein powder into a muscle-like fibrous structure that can then be
shaped into delicious steaks. "We can currently produce beef, pork and
chicken-like steaks with a lab-scale capacity," notes Tilen Travnik, CEO
at [Bevo](https://www.linkedin.com/company/bevo-tech/).

**CHALLENGE:** **Transform plant-based dairy innovation**

\'\'At Those Vegan Cowboys, we create the ultimate follow-up to
traditional dairy by expressing casein genes in yeast and fungi. Caseins
are then produced large scale by grass-fed fermentation," details Jaap
Korteweg, CEO at [Those Vegan Cowboys](https://thosevegancowboys.com/)
and founding father of [The Vegetarian
Butcher](https://www.thevegetarianbutcher.com/). This pioneering CEO is
taking the next step in dairy production, from hand milking, via the
milking machine to the fully automatic milking robot of today.

**CHALLENGE:** **Make plant-based foods tastier, healthier and more
sustainable**

[The Live Green Co](https://www.thelivegreenco.com/) is disrupting the
way the world consumes by recommending 100% natural plant alternatives
for the animal as well as synthetic and highly-processed additives in
our daily foods. "The Live Green Co is participating in the TechHub at
Future Food-Tech to scout for like-minded production and distribution
partners globally, along with networking with industry peers," shares
Pri Srinivas, Founder and CEO at [The Live Green
Co](https://www.thelivegreenco.com/).

**THE FUTURE IS DATA AND AI**

**CHALLENGE: Use AI to develop next-generation protein-based
ingredients**

[Protera](https://www.proterabio.com/) has created a process called
Natural Intelligence™, which takes advantage of proprietary AI
algorithms to craft functional proteins. \"We are leveraging our deep
learning technology to shine a light on a previously untapped universe
of functional proteins. Our team is developing next-generation
clean-label texturizing and food-preserving proteins,\" explains
Leonardo Alvarez, Founder and CEO at
[Protera](https://www.proterabio.com/).

**CHALLENGE:** **Use AI and data-powered genomics to match ingredients
to products**

"The basis of food is an ingredient, and the basis of human life is a
gene. By leading the way in understanding and mapping the relationship
between ingredients and human genes, we are making food as medicine a
reality," says Leena Pradhan-Nabzdyk, CEO at
[Canomiks](https://www.canomiks.com/). The company is the first
technology company using genomics, bioinformatics, and an AI-based
technology platform to test and certify biological efficacy and safety
of ingredients and formulations.

**NOVEL TECHNOLOGY, INGREDIENTS AND APPROACHES**

**CHALLENGE:** **Accelerate development of novel ingredients**

 "[Zymtronix](http://zymtronix.com/) packs and deploys enzymes as green
catalysts, making ingredients more efficiently and precisely than
chemistry or fermentation," says Stephane Corgie, CEO at
[Zymtronix](http://zymtronix.com/). The breakthrough enzyme
immobilization platform improves the activity, stability and reusability
of any enzyme to tackle the complex production of novel ingredients
while developing efficient processes and lowering costs.

**CHALLENGE:** **Accelerate tailoring of aromas, color and taste for
spirits**

"[Bespoken Spirits](https://www.bespokenspirits.com/) precisely tailors
spirits for aroma, color and taste in just days by replacing the
antiquated and wasteful barrel aging process with sustainable science
and technology," explains Stu Aaron, Co-Founder at Bespoken Spirits. Its
proprietary ACTivation technology makes it possible to extract the key
elements of the barrel that enhance aroma, color and taste (ACT) but
with precision, control and speed.

**CHALLENGE:** **Next generation alternatives to plastic packaging** 

 "Using a novel approach and solid polymer science,
[StenCo](https://www.stencollc.com/) is utilizing inexpensive,
nature-based materials to address some of today\'s most pressing
environmental issues," notes John Brown, CEO at
[StenCo](https://www.stencollc.com/). The company has developed an
oxygen barrier better than most plastics to keep food fresh.

**CHALLENGE:** **Low cost material identification and ingredients
analysis**

"[Senorics](https://senorics.com/) develops small, powerful and low-cost
material sensing sensors to provide insights into the composition of
food and beverages. Now, we are looking to connect with industry leaders
to identify high impact and beneficial applications to the benefit of
organizations and consumers alike," explains Robert Langer, CCO at
[Senorics](https://senorics.com/). The company designs and builds
miniaturized material sensing sensor solutions.

All the start-up presenters on the program at Future Food-Tech this
December 2-3 will be quizzed by the summit's shark panel of investors to
drill down into the potential of each solution.

Shark panelist Tomer Diari, Vice President at Bessemer Venture Partners
summarizes: "Emerging companies are leveraging innovative technology
alongside the Silicon Valley playbook to disrupt the food industry.
We're excited to see them completely transforming the industry
throughout the next decade."

The virtual **[Future Food-Tech
Summit](http://www.futurefoodtechnyc.com)** will bring together food
brands, retailers, ingredient manufacturers, technology providers and
investors for two days of online networking and knowledge-exchange.

**Rethink Events:**

Bringing together the best minds in the industry, Rethink Events'
international series of conferences identify and assess new technology
investment opportunities in agriculture, food, water and waste. We
address the issues most crucial to investors and developers. After
extensive research, we create hard-hitting agendas, rich in content, and
featuring the industry's most influential figures. Through intensive
debate and valuable networking, key contacts are made and deals are
struck, while new business ideas take root and flourish.
[www.rethinkevents.com](http://www.rethinkevents.com)

**Future Food-Tech:**

Future Food-Tech takes place three times a year in San Francisco, New
York and London, plus also in Singapore as part of the Asia-Pacific
Agri-Food Innovation Week. At present the summits are being held
virtually to keep the industry connected as we emerge from the COVID-19
pandemic. The summits generate valuable opportunities for networking,
knowledge exchange and deal-making among its international delegation of
food businesses, retailers, technology providers, entrepreneurs and
investors. <https://futurefoodtechnyc.com/>
