---
title: "Michroma Closes $6.4 Million Seed Round to Bring Novel Food Coloring to Market"
date: 2023-02-01 14:00:00
lastmod: 2023-02-01 14:00:00
slug: michroma-closes-64-million-seed-round-bring-novel-food-coloring-market
company: 11244
description: "Michroma, a leading precision fermentation food ingredient company, today announced it has closed $6.4 million in seed financing."
excerpt: "Michroma, a leading precision fermentation food ingredient company, today announced it has closed $6.4 million in seed financing."
proteins: [Fungi]
products: [Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Latin America & Caribbean, US & Canada]
flags: [Press Release, Investments]
directory: [11244]
images: ["Michroma - Red 2.jpg","Michroma - Fungal Colonies.jpg", "Michroma - Red and culture medium.jpg", "Michroma - Founders.jpg", "Michroma - Warm Colors.jpg", "Michroma - Synbio.jpg", "Michroma - Fun team photo_0.jpg", "Michroma - Plant-Based.jpg", "Michroma - Hamburger.jpg", "Michroma - Ice Cream.jpg"]
featured_image: "Michroma - Red 2.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "Michroma - Red"
additional_images:
  - src: "Michroma - Fungal Colonies.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Fungal Colonies"
    alt: "Michroma - Fungal Colonies"
    title: "Michroma - Fungal Colonies"
  - src: "Michroma - Red and culture medium.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Red and culture medium"
    alt: "Michroma - Red and culture medium"
    title: "Michroma - Red and culture medium"
  - src: "Michroma - Founders.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Founders"
    alt: "Michroma - Founders"
    title: "Michroma - Founders"
  - src: "Michroma - Warm Colors.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Warm Colors"
    alt: "Michroma - Warm Colors"
    title: "Michroma - Warm Colors"
  - src: "Michroma - Synbio.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Synbio"
    alt: "Michroma - Synbio"
    title: "Michroma - Synbio"
  - src: "Michroma - Fun team photo_0.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Fun team photo"
    alt: "Michroma - Fun team photo"
    title: "Michroma - Fun team photo"
  - src: "Michroma - Plant-Based.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Plant-Based"
    alt: "Michroma - Plant-Based"
    title: "Michroma - Plant-Based"
  - src: "Michroma - Hamburger.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Hamburger"
    alt: "Michroma - Hamburger"
    title: "Michroma - Hamburger"
  - src: "Michroma - Ice Cream.jpg"
    caption: "Michroma - Ice Cream"
    alt: "Michroma - Ice Cream"
    title: "Michroma - Ice Cream"
draft: false
uuid: 11245
---
*Ingredient biotech startup Michroma is on track to expand and scale
fungal food colors platform.*

SAN FRANCISCO, Calif., February 1, 2023 -- Michroma, a leading precision
fermentation food ingredient company, today announced it has closed
\$6.4 million in seed financing. The round will fast-track the company's
commercialization of sustainable natural colorants, expand research and
development capabilities, and broaden Michroma's ingredient platform.
The company removes petroleum - the base ingredient in mainstream
colorants - from the food ingredient value chain.

The \$6.4m round was led by Supply Change Capital, a food tech VC backed
by 301 INC, the corporate venture capital arm of General Mills. New
investors include Be8 Ventures, which is backed by Dr. Oetker, a global
food company based in over 40 countries; and CJ CheilJedang, a \$23
billion Korean conglomerate that is the world\'s leading supplier of
fermentation-based bio-products.

\"We see compelling market and consumer potential for Michroma\'s fungal
platform to create next-generation natural ingredients, from colorants
to flavors, that are healthier and more sustainable while maximizing
production efficiency.  We are excited by the speed and skill with which
they are building out their capabilities. Even more so, in light of the
current disruption of supply chains globally, we believe Michroma is
laying the foundation for the sustainable ingredients of the future.\"
said Noramay Cadena, Supply Change Capital's Managing Director and
Michroma Board Member.

\"We are poised to meet consumer demand for healthier and more
sustainable food without petroleum-based ingredients," said Michroma's
CEO and Co-founder, Ricky Cassini. "Unlike the current generation of
unstable natural options, like betalains, carminic acid, and
anthocyanins, Michroma is producing better-performing natural colorants
powered by fungi. This next stage of our development will help us
industrialize our fungal platform and enable the world's transition to
natural colors."

Michroma's novel approach centers on creating fungal biofactories to
produce small molecules, like colors, more efficiently. "We are
leveraging the power and versatility of filamentous fungi with our
synbio platform. By combining a unique fungal chassis strain with
precision fermentation, we are capable of producing high-value complex
molecules with high yields previously unseen in the biotech industry,"
said Michroma's CSO and Co-Founder, Dr. Mauricio Braia.

Founded in 2019,  Michroma pioneered the movement toward a disruptive
advance in the ingredients industry with high-performance colorants made
from fungi using precision fermentation. Fueled by the increasing market
demand for healthier and more sustainable ingredients, Michroma started
by developing a novel red colorant called Red+, which is
temperature-resistant and stable across the entire food pH spectrum.
These characteristics allow colors to survive processes like
pasteurization, cooking, and extrusion, which are among the most
intensive processes for natural dyes. The company's product pipeline
starts with warm colors, which comprise 90% of the food market, and goes
beyond to include other colors and novel flavors that will be sold in
combination, allowing for integrated solutions for companies. 

The \$2.6B food colorants market continues to trend toward natural
ingredients. According to a
[poll](https://www.foodnavigator.com/Article/2011/10/06/Nielsen-poll-indicates-global-preference-for-natural-food-colours),
92% of people are concerned about artificial colors and large food
manufacturers (BurgerKing, Nestle, Kraft, Mars, General Mills, etc.) are
transitioning away from artificial colors to meet health-conscious
consumers' demand for natural ingredient alternatives. Leading research
underscores the detrimental effects of artificial colorant consumption,
with the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA)
[concluding](https://oehha.ca.gov/risk-assessment/press-release/report-links-synthetic-food-dyes-hyperactivity-and-other)
in 2021 that artificial food dyes impact neurobehavior in some children.
More recently the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) received a
[petition](https://www.cspinet.org/resource/red-3-petition) from The
Center for Science in the Public Interest and 23 other organizations and
prominent scientists​​ to ban the use of Red No. 3 colorant in food.

New investors in Michroma include FEN Ventures, Boro Capital, The Mills
Fabrica, Portfolia's Food & Ag Tech Fund, New Luna Ventures, Siddhi
Capital, Groundswell Ventures, and HackCapital; and Angels investors
Allen Miner, Jun Ueki and Steve Zurcher from the Keiretsu Japan Forum,
Guillermo Rosental, Franco Goytia, Pablo Pla and Mat Travizano. Existing
investors participating in the round are SOSV's IndieBio and GRIDX.

Following prototyping with some of the world\'s largest food companies,
Michroma is negotiating agreements for Red+ with ingredients suppliers
for global distribution and will submit color additive petitions to the
FDA and EFSA as the company continues its path to scale.

**About Michroma   **

Next-gen ingredients made by fungi  --- Michroma is a foodtech startup
revolutionizing the way ingredients are produced by developing
fungal-based biofactories to produce natural ingredients in a
sustainable, scalable, and cost-effective way. Produced using synbio and
precision fermentation, Michroma\'s first product is a high-performance
natural red colorant well suited for all diets and food applications
with supreme pH and thermal stability that had been selected as the
\"Most Innovative Ingredient for Food or Beverage 2020\" by Fi Global.
By leveraging the power of our fungal biofactories, Michroma is
producing additional high-value-added ingredients such as flavors and
fragrances in a sustainable and cost-efficient way to replace
petroleum-based ingredients, which are harmful to humans and the
planet\'s health. For more information, please visit
[www.michroma.co](http://www.michroma.co)

**About Supply Change Capital**

Supply Change Capital invests in the future of food. With a lens for
culture and climate, they focus on early stage technology companies
across the supply chain that are responding to the seismic shift in the
\$6 trillion food industry. Their portfolio of 13 companies spans
regenerative agriculture, alternative proteins, ingredient technology,
food safety, and culture-first brands. Founding General Partners Noramay
Cadena and Shayna Harris met at MIT Sloan in 2009, each bring over 20
years of operational experience in public and private markets, and have
over 75 investments between them. They support founders post-investment
via their signature Supercharge III program which helps elevate
individual and organizational awareness for more effective leadership in
fast-growing organizations. Learn more at
[www.supplychange.fund](http://www.supplychangecapital.fund), and on
Twitter (@supplychangecap) and Instagram (@supplychangecapital).
