---
title: "Protein Literacy Basics: Antimicrobial Resistance"
date: 2021-04-27 13:55:17
lastmod: 2021-04-27 13:55:17
slug: protein-literacy-basics-antimicrobial-resistance
description: "Although antibiotics are generally thought of in the context of treating infections within our healthcare systems, that’s not where most are actually used. Globally, around 73% of all antibiotics are used in animals grown for food."
excerpt: "Although antibiotics are generally thought of in the context of treating infections within our healthcare systems, that’s not where most are actually used. Globally, around 73% of all antibiotics are used in animals grown for food."
proteins: [Animal]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Eggs, Seafood]
topics: [Health, Policy]
regions: [International]
flags: [Featured, Explainer]
directory: [685]
contributors: [8107]
images: ["global antimicrobial consumption in livestock3.jpg"]
featured_image: "global antimicrobial consumption in livestock3.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "Global antimicrobial consumption in livestock. Source: Van Boeckel et al, PNAS 2015. Modified by Protein Report."
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 8812
---
*This article is part of our Protein Literacy series, a collection of
explainers and educational tools exploring key protein industry
challenges and possible solutions.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**What is antimicrobial resistance and why is it a problem?**

Antimicrobial resistance occurs when microbes develop the ability to
survive or grow in the presence of the drugs designed to kill them. This
renders existing medicines less effective at fighting infections, which
means those infections become more deadly.

[According to the CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/index.html),
"Each year in the U.S., at least 2.8 million people get an
antibiotic-resistant infection, and more than 35,000 people die."
Worldwide this figure is 700,000 deaths, and the Antimicrobial
Resistance Industry Alliance projects that number will [rise to 10
million](https://www.amrindustryalliance.org/why-amr/) by 2050. The
Director-General of the World Health Organization, Dr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus, [has
said](https://www.who.int/news/item/07-11-2017-stop-using-antibiotics-in-healthy-animals-to-prevent-the-spread-of-antibiotic-resistance)
"a lack of effective antibiotics is as serious a security threat as a
sudden and deadly disease outbreak."

The effects of such infections are not just health related; one strain
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria alone classified as "urgent" by the CDC
was associated with [\$281
million](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/threats-report/2019-ar-threats-report-508.pdf)
in healthcare costs in 2017. Global healthcare costs incurred due to
antibiotic-resistant infections are expected to reach [\$1
trillion](https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/09/18/by-2050-drug-resistant-infections-could-cause-global-economic-damage-on-par-with-2008-financial-crisis)
per year by 2050.

Drug-resistant pathogens not only compromise human health, they also
jeopardize the well being of livestock and wildlife populations that
play vital roles in the environment. For this reason, the CDC calls
antibiotic resistance a [One
Health](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/threats-report/2019-ar-threats-report-508.pdf)
challenge in which "the health of people is connected to the health of
animals and the environment."

**How does antimicrobial resistance work?**

Antimicrobial resistance happens when germs are exposed to drugs,
develop mechanisms of resistance against those drugs, and pass on these
mechanisms to other members of their population. By the principle of
natural selection, when exposed to a drug, the germs that survive are
those that contain a mutation more effective at withstanding the drug.
These germs then outlive their ill-adapted counterparts, reproduce more,
and their mutation becomes characteristic of the entire population. The
more a given drug is used, the more opportunities a germ species has to
evolve a characteristic that can resist it.

In addition to inheritance of these traits as the result of evolution
within a population, resistant elements can also be transferred between
individual bacteria. This happens through the sharing of the [mobile
genetic
elements](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/threats-report/2019-ar-threats-report-508.pdf)
which are responsible for resistance mechanisms including plasmids,
transposons, and phages which can be integrated into another germ cell
through transduction, conjugation, or transformation.

{{< figure src="amr_cdc.png" alt="How mobile genetic elements contribute to the spread of antibiotic resistance" caption="How mobile genetic elements contribute to the spread of antibiotic resistance. Source: [CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/threats-report/2019-ar-threats-report-508.pdf)." >}}

The process of microbes becoming resistant to drugs is naturally
occurring, but it is expedited when those drugs are constantly present
in an environment. This can happen through the overuse of fungicides and
pesticides in commercial agriculture, as well as with antibiotics used
to treat infections in patients and mitigate the spread of disease
among livestock.

For instance, penicillin was the first commercialized antibiotic
discovered in 1941 by Alex Flemming and was widely used during the
second half of the twentieth century. During that time, [three
significant germs](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/about.html)
developed that were resistant to penicillin: Staphylococcus aureus in
1942, Streptococcus pneumoniae in 1967, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae in
1975. This has limited the modern use of penicillin and related
drugs today.

According to the [World Economic
Forum](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/06/antibiotics-are-contaminating-the-world-s-rivers/),
the overuse of antibiotics is "leading us into a post-antibiotic world
in which people will once again die from common infections and
minor injuries."

**What does it have to do with protein?**

Although antibiotics are generally thought of in the context of treating
infections within our healthcare systems, that's not where most of the
world's antibiotics are actually used.

In the United States, [more than
70%](https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/antimicrobial_resistance/docs/amr_studies_2015_am-in-agri-and-env.pdf)
of all medically important antibiotics are used in livestock, while in
Canada [more than
80%](http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/livestock/animalcare/amr/facts/17-017.htm)
of all antibiotics are used in agriculture. Globally, [around
73%](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7766021/) of all
antibiotics are used in animals grown for food. By 2030, the total
amount of antimicrobials used in food animals is [projected to
increase](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/357/6358/1350) by as
much as 53% over 2013 levels.

Why are farm animals consuming so many antimicrobials?

"The high population density of modern intensively managed livestock
operations results in sharing of both commensal flora and pathogens,
which can be conducive to rapid dissemination of infectious agents. As a
result, livestock in these environments commonly require aggressive
infection management strategies," explains Timothy F. Landers et al in a
[2012 paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3234384/).
They go on to detail how antibiotics are not only used to treat and
prevent disease in such environments, but are also used to enhance
animal growth.

According to the [FAIRR
Initiative](https://www.fairr.org/article/improving-antibiotics-stewardship-in-livestock-supply-chains/),
an investor network worth \$38 trillion, "To be profitable, companies
have relied on the routine mass medication of farm animals with
antibiotics, both as a means to increase feed efficiency and to reduce
mortality." In their [Protein Producer
Index](https://www.fairr.org/index/), FAIRR ranks 60 of the world's
largest meat, fish, and dairy producers and has [found
70%](https://www.fairr.org/article/improving-antibiotics-stewardship-in-livestock-supply-chains/)
to be "high risk" for antibiotics, indicating "extremely poor levels of
antibiotic stewardship."

As explained by the Director of the Department of Food Safety and
Zoonoses at WHO, [Dr. Kazuaki
Miyagishima](https://www.who.int/news/item/07-11-2017-stop-using-antibiotics-in-healthy-animals-to-prevent-the-spread-of-antibiotic-resistance),
"scientific evidence demonstrates that overuse of antibiotics in animals
can contribute to the emergence of antibiotic resistance. The volume of
antibiotics used in animals is continuing to increase worldwide, driven
by a growing demand for foods of animal origin, often produced through
intensive animal husbandry."

{{< figure src="global antimicrobial consumption in livestock2.jpg" alt="Global antimicrobial consumption in livestock" caption="Global antimicrobial consumption in livestock. Source: [Van Boeckel et al, PNAS 2015](https://www.pnas.org/content/112/18/5649)." >}}

[Some
stakeholders](http://www.meatmythcrushers.com/myths/myth-antibiotic-use-in-livestock-production-is-a-human-health-risk.html)
argue that strains of antibiotic-resistant bacteria which develop in
farm animals do not pose risks to human health. However, other
researchers have found decades of evidence indicating otherwise. In
their [2012
paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3234384/), Timothy
F. Landers et al cite studies showing "Associations between antibiotic
use in food animals and the prevalence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria
isolated from those animals have been detected in observational studies
as well as in randomized trials. Antibiotic-resistant bacteria of animal
origin have been observed in the environment surrounding livestock
farming operations, on meat products available for purchase in retail
food stores, and as the cause of clinical infections and subclinical
colonization in humans."

The CDC [also
notes](https://www.cdc.gov/foodsafety/challenges/antibiotic-resistance.html)
that "when animals are slaughtered and processed for food, resistant
bacteria can contaminate meat or other animal products" leading to
antibiotic-resistant intestinal infections if these foods are handled or
consumed. For example, a notable February 2019 American
[outbreak](https://www.cdc.gov/salmonella/infantis-10-18/index.html) of
a multidrug resistant strain of salmonella was linked to the consumption
of raw and undercooked chicken.

Overuse of antibiotics in livestock doesn't only risk contaminating food
products. [Up to
90%](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4378521/) of
antibiotics ingested by livestock are secreted in urine and waste which
is then dispersed in fertilizer and surface runoff contributing to
diffuse environmental contamination. In 2019, the first global study of
[antibiotics in the world's
rivers](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/06/antibiotics-are-contaminating-the-world-s-rivers/)
found that two thirds of the world's rivers are polluted by antibiotics
with certain concentrations exceeding 300 times above what is
considered safe.

**How can antimicrobial resistance be mitigated?**

In 2019, the CDC's [AR Threats
Report](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/threats-report/2019-ar-threats-report-508.pdf)
listed 18 resistant germs as either "urgent," "serious," or a
"concerning threat." In order to mitigate the further development and
spread of antibiotic resistance, [they
recommend](https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/food.html) improving
antibiotic use so they are administered only when necessary rather than
as a routine procedure.

In the United States, the USDA along with the FDA and EPA administers
the US [National Residue
Program](https://www.fsis.usda.gov/science-data/data-sets-visualizations/residue-chemistry)
which attempts to reduce the amount of antibiotic residues (small
quantities of unabsorbed antibiotics) entering the food supply. Since
2006, the European Union [has
banned](https://www.who.int/news/item/07-11-2017-stop-using-antibiotics-in-healthy-animals-to-prevent-the-spread-of-antibiotic-resistance)
the use of antibiotics for growth promotion. The WHO [also
suggests](https://www.who.int/news/item/07-11-2017-stop-using-antibiotics-in-healthy-animals-to-prevent-the-spread-of-antibiotic-resistance)
that "antibiotics used in animals should be selected from those listed
as being 'least important' to human health, and not from those
classified as 'highest priority' and 'critically important.'"

But policy isn't the only available lever for addressing the
problem --- investors and food producers also have a role to play.

According to the FAIRR Initiative, "Investors now recognise that the
routine non-therapeutic use of antibiotics in livestock production is a
leading cause of rising antimicrobial resistance worldwide." [They
report](https://www.fairr.org/article/improving-antibiotics-stewardship-in-livestock-supply-chains/)
that between 2010 and 2019, 24 shareholder resolutions on antibiotics
overuse in livestock have been filed in the United States. FAIRR has
also developed a [Best Practice
Policy](https://antibioticsstatement.fairr.org/policy/) for food
producers and retailers, and coordinated a global [investor
statement](https://antibioticsstatement.fairr.org/) on antibiotics
stewardship whose signatories include 75 investors managing over \$3
trillion in assets. In 2020, FAIRR, along with the Access to Medicine
Foundation, PRI, and the UK Government, launched [Investor Action on
AMR](https://amrinvestoraction.org/about), a new initiative to leverage
investor influence to combat drug-resistant superbugs.

The issue is also starting to see some push coming from the public; many
consumers are increasingly favoring meat products with [label
claims](https://www.fsis.usda.gov/sites/default/files/import/RaisingClaims.pdf)
such as "No Antibiotics Ever," "Raised without Antibiotics," and "No
Added Antibiotics." But such all-or-nothing approaches are probably not
the solution --- after all, just like humans, animals also sometimes get
sick and need medicine.

In a 2017
[article](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/357/6358/1350)
published in *Science,* an international group of biologists, policy,
and disease specialists proposed a three-pronged approach to reducing
antimicrobial use in livestock in order to mitigate the development of
drug-resistant infections in humans and animals. Through a combination
of policies that cap permissible levels of veterinary antibiotic
consumption, reduce meat consumption, and raise the cost of veterinary
antimicrobials, the global use of antimicrobials in food animals could
be lowered by as much as 80% by 2030. Even if only the countries in the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and China
implemented just some of these strategies, global antimicrobial use in
animals could be reduced by as much as 60%.
