---
title: "Meet the Innovators Challenging and Changing Asia’s Agri-Food System"
date: 2021-10-19 13:25:34
lastmod: 2021-10-19 13:25:34
slug: meet-innovators-challenging-and-changing-asias-agri-food-system
company_name: "Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit"
company_link: "https://agrifoodinnovation.com/"
description: "The Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit takes place on November 16-18, showcasing 30+ dynamic start-ups who will present breakthrough technologies to an international audience in-person in Singapore and globally on the virtual summit platform."
excerpt: "The Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit takes place on November 16-18, showcasing 30+ dynamic start-ups who will present breakthrough technologies to an international audience in-person in Singapore and globally on the virtual summit platform."
proteins: [Plant-Based, Fungi]
products: [Meat, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Asia]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [1328]
images: ["apac.png","APAC21 - Meet The Start-Ups.png"]
featured_image: "apac.png"
additional_images:
  - src: "APAC21 - Meet The Start-Ups.png"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 9880
---
As Asia's policymakers and agri-food leaders prepare for major urban
population growth and the increasing impact of climate change, there is
massive potential for global start-ups launching innovative solutions
for sustainable food production in this region.

The Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit takes place on November
16-18, showcasing 30+ dynamic start-ups who will present breakthrough
technologies to an international audience in-person in Singapore and
globally on the virtual summit platform.

Areas covered by these agri-food pioneers range from novel proteins and
ingredients for plant-based products, to digital tools for supply chain
connectivity and efficiency, circular solutions for food waste and
packaging, and smart tech for aquaculture and precision agriculture.

The summit features multiple touchpoints to meet dynamic innovators,
from a live pitching afternoon in Singapore, to virtual showcases with
judging panels and investor Q&As.

**Singapore Live Pitch Afternoon**

Hosted live from Singapore on November 16, and livestreamed to the
global delegate audience, the Singapore Pitch Afternoon will celebrate
the talent and innovation coming out of the region. Summit partner
**Enterprise Singapore** has handpicked eight exciting agri-food
start-ups who will take the stage to pitch their technology and business
models:

**Hoow Foods** is a deep-tech food tech company specialising in R&D and
commercialisation of consumer-packaged food products and functional
ingredients using food science and AI technology.

**Insectta** is the first urban insect farm in Singapore, rearing the
black soldier fly. The company takes food waste and returns it into the
economy as valuable biomaterials such as Chitosan, melanin and
probiotics.

**LivFresh** aims to reduce the farm-to-table distance to under 6 hours,
to let customers enjoy 100% pesticide and additive-free produce at
maximum freshness.

**Mycovation** is a mycelium protein company developing food ingredients
that are vegan, nutritious, affordable and sustainable through
mycoprotein technology.

**Shandi Global** is an alternative-meat company that develops
plant-based chicken protein using a combination of high moisture meat
analogous (HMMA) extrusion method and amino acids.

**SinFooTech** has perfected a patented fermentation technique for the
bio-transformation of soy whey (waste by-product from tofu production)
into a first-of-its-kind alcoholic beverage, named Sachi.

**Straits Biopharma** is eager to lead the revolution of plant-biologics
and phyto-nutrient premium nutriceutical ingredient formulations
targeted at chronic diseases from soil to lab to shelf.

**TeOra** has developed proprietary technology platforms for natural,
sustainable solutions to prevent disease and promote growth in shrimp.

**The Cargill and CPF Innovation Challenges - Finalists Announced**

Global food companies **CPF** and **Cargill** have each created a
start-up Innovation Challenge to uncover fresh talent and technologies
that could benefit the APAC agri-food value chain.

Over 100 start-ups applied for the chance to work with these agri-food
leaders and present in front of the global virtual summit audience.
After a rigorous selection process, the finalists have been revealed for
each challenge:

**The Cargill Innovation Challenge: Digital Solutions to Connect and
Enhance the Sustainable Food Production Chain in APAC**

**Centaur Analytics** (USA) offers predictive route planning and risk
analysis for perishable goods (eg soya, cocoa) for sustainable shipping
and logistics. It is committed to reduce the estimated \$1 trillion of
annual post-harvest value loss from farm to shelf, by deploying its
cognitive connected solutions globally and by empowering growers, ag and
food companies with predictive quality analytics and prescriptive,
automated interventions.

**Connecting Food** (France) harnesses blockchain technology to improve
food security, reduce wastage and reinforce consumer trust in our food
systems. Connecting Food leverages industry expertise to map food supply
chains, improve end-to-end traceability and showcase value chain data
via a QR code & WebApp, bringing trust through transparency to
consumers.

**PEEL Lab** (Japan) technology upcycles fruits and vegetables to create
low impact bio-based vegan leather. Its manufacturers then create
custom-designed products that empower corporates to join the race
towards \"Net Zero\" by 2050.  PEEL Lab is now in R&D on coconut husk
and shell with mango peel to follow.

Commenting on the applications, Colin D'Silva, Vice President,
Government Relations for Asia-Pacific at Cargill said *"We are
thoroughly impressed with the calibre of entries received for the
Cargill Innovation Challenge. It's inspiring to see so many innovative
start-ups share Cargill's vision of sustainable food production and
supply chains, realized through innovative digital solutions. It was
tough to make our selection of finalists. We are looking forward to
learning more about their work, and to a successful partnership with the
winner to advance our sustainability ambition and commitment."*

**The CPF Innovation Challenge: Enhancing Texture, Juiciness and Aroma
to Create Healthy Plant-Based Meat Alternatives**

**Audra Labs** (Singapore) uses patented fibre technology to capture
real meat and fat textures in every bite, and its mild processing
conditions preserve the nutritional qualities of ingredients. Committed
to working towards a better future, utilising renewable resources,
adopting sustainable technologies, and minimising waste to produce
upcycled goods, Audra Labs believes that food should never be waste.

**Lypid** (USA) brings luscious texture, lip-smacking mouthfeel, and
long-lasting flavour and juiciness to plant-based meat. Vegan oils have
different textures, melting points, water content, and flavours than
animal fats. Lypid is creating a line of fats made from vegan oils that
can be tuned to precise textures and melting points.

**Novameat** (Spain) produces plant-based whole cuts from a wide variety
of vegetable proteins, bringing to market the world's most realistic
centre-of-the-plate meat successors using its ground-breaking
micro-extrusion technology.

Lalana Thiranusornkij, SVP - Head of Innovation and New Product
Development at **CPF Group** said *\"There are so many amazing start-ups
who want to be able to provide quality solutions and this platform has
enabled us who are looking for solutions to find our match! The
applications are very interesting, and we look forward to working with
these talents to offer the best alternative proteins to our consumers in
a sustainable way.\"*

The winner of each challenge will be revealed live during the virtual
summit on November 17. The selected start-ups will unlock valuable
access to senior leadership coaching, product development and trials
with their challenge partner. See full details at
[www.agrifoodinnovation.com/innovation-challenge](http://www.agrifoodinnovation.com/innovation-challenge)

**Innovation in Action -- Regional Spotlight**

Highlighting talent from across APAC, summit partners **GROW** and **The
Yield Lab** will introduce exciting agri-food start-ups from their
cohorts, who will each share an exclusive glimpse at their technology in
action.

**GROW:**

**Braintree Technologies** **(Malaysia)** offers robotic
farming-as-a-service that transforms unattended land into agricultural
spaces, raising smallholder incomes and reducing emissions.

**Buggy Bix (Australia)** make healthy, delicious, all-natural pet food
products using edible insects -- an excellent source of protein that is
better for the environment.

**DataFarming (Australia)** is Australia's most popular precision ag
software, delivering an easy-to-use, low-cost platform to help you grow
smarter.

**Green Rebel (Indonesia)** is Indonesia\'s top selling plant-based
protein brand, using local ingredients to create clean-label meat
alternatives with distinct Asian flavours.

**Mayani (Philippines)** is an ag e-commerce platform helping
smallholders access new customers and markets, while digitalizing the
supply chain to reduce food loss.

**Seadling (Singapore)** produces functional ingredients for pet,
aquaculture, and animal feed manufacturers from sustainably farmed
seaweed.

**S4S (India)** combines solar-powered dehydration tech with
micro-entrepreneurship to transform social and supply chain
inefficiencies in developing countries.

**Taka Gin (Australia)** makes gin inspired by Indigenous fusion
flavours using native ingredients and incorporating little-known
botanicals.

**THE YIELD LAB:**

**Aptimmune Biologics (USA)** creates valuable, safe, and effective
vaccines to combat economically challenging swine diseases using its
proprietary Barricade platform technology.

**Bloomfield Robotics (USA)** delivers an innovative, easy-to-use and
cost-effective combination of ground-based image capture and deep
learning-based processing to help growers precisely, efficiently, and
affordably assess every plant.

**DiMuto (Singapore)** is an Agri-Food Trade Solution that unifies
product, document and payment data in one single platform, creating
end-to-end trade visibility across global food supply chains.

**Fasal (India)** provides farmers with crop-specific real-time
actionable insights, integrating agronomy knowledge and microclimatic
data obtained from hardware agnostic sensors.

**Umami Meats (Singapore)** is developing cell-cultured fish that is
delicious, affordable, sustainable, and better for health, oceans, and
the planet.

**Wittaya Aqua (Canada)** is a software and service company that helps
aquaculture farms, feed and feed ingredient companies use data to make
better decisions.

Commenting on the importance of start-ups in the summit's programme,
Ellen McLeay, Senior Conference Producer of the Asia-Pacific Agri-Food
Innovation Summit said *"Our global food production systems face
unprecedented challenges as we witness the growing impacts of climate
change and urban population growth. Established businesses are evolving
to meet these challenges and collaborations with innovation partners
will be key to their success. From its inception, our goal for the
Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit has been to provide a platform
for start-ups to showcase their critical solutions, and to facilitate
the important conversations that lead to collaboration. We're excited to
feature so many breakthrough start-ups throughout the event programme,
showcasing the incredible innovation and talent that the APAC region has
to offer, and highlighting the important role they play in the future of
food production."*

The Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit on November 16-18 brings
together over 700 global delegates for three days of virtual panel
sessions, roundtable discussions, and 1-1 video meetings -- plus
in-person talks and workshops in Singapore.

Start-ups still have the opportunity to be a part of the programme.
Innovators with fresh solutions for open field or urban agriculture,
aquaculture, novel food ingredients or nutrition poised to change the
face of Asia's agri-food ecosystem are invited to get in touch.

The three-day Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit programme and
speaker faculty are available now, with delegate registration (in-person
and virtual) at
[www.agrifoodinnovation.com](http://www.agrifoodinnovation.com)

**About the Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit:**
[**www.agrifoodinnovation.com**](http://www.agrifoodinnovation.com)
** **

Scaling Sustainable Food Production in Asia

Now in its fourth year, the Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit on
November 16-18, 2021, will bring together the world's leading
agribusinesses, growers, CPG and ingredient brands, entrepreneurs,
investors, retailers and policymakers to share ideas and collaborate
towards greater security and sustainability in Asia's agri-food system.

From empowering smallholder farmers and building more connected,
resilient supply chains to indoor farming models, holistic nutrition and
health strategies, the summit will identify the most important
opportunities and challenges as the region recovers from the COVID-19
pandemic.

A hybrid event combining both in-person elements in Singapore and a full
virtual experience tailored to an international audience, the summit
will facilitate high-value connections and foster long-lasting business
relationships across Asia and around the world.

Proudly part of Singapore International Agri-Food Week (SIAW).
[www.sginternationalagrifoodweek.com.sg/](http://www.sginternationalagrifoodweek.com.sg/)

**About Rethink Events:**
[**www.rethinkevents.com**](http://www.rethinkevents.com)** **

UK-based Rethink Events organises international, world-renowned business
technology summits, bringing together the brightest and best minds among
entrepreneurs, businesses and global investors in sustainable food,
agriculture, materials and water.
