---
title: "How Cellular Agriculture Can Strengthen Australiaâ€™s Agtech Sector"
date: 2020-07-28 13:36:28
lastmod: 2020-07-28 13:36:28
slug: how-cellular-agriculture-can-strengthen-australias-agtech-sector
description: "As global demand for protein grows steadily, our sources of animal protein must diversify to keep up. And Australia is well placed to become an international powerhouse for an emerging research field that could transform the way we produce and eat meat: cellular agriculture."
excerpt: "As global demand for protein grows steadily, our sources of animal protein must diversify to keep up. And Australia is well placed to become an international powerhouse for an emerging research field that could transform the way we produce and eat meat: cellular agriculture."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Oceania]
flags: [Featured]
directory: [698, 5804, 5805, 7131, 7168]
contributors: [8105]
images: ["cows.jpg"]
featured_image: "cows.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "Cows at sunset in rural Kiama, NSW, Australia. Photo by Laura Barry on Unsplash."
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 7364
---
As global demand for protein grows steadily, our sources of animal
protein must diversify to keep up. And Australia is well placed to
become an international powerhouse for an emerging research field that
could transform the way we produce and eat meat: cellular agriculture.

The cellular agriculture industry develops animal products -- such as
meat, eggs, and leather -- without the need for conventional animal
agriculture. The technology could have major implications for the
environment, animal welfare, biodiversity, and human health.

So far, the US dominates the \"alternative protein\" space. But cellular
agriculture has recently become a compelling opportunity for
entrepreneurs and investors in Australia, thanks to our internationally
renowned expertise in both the animal agriculture industry and the stem
cell and biomaterials research sector.

**All hands on deck**

Like any emerging industry, cellular agriculture will create new
markets, new applications, and new jobs -- particularly for those with
STEM skills. As the number of university graduates in STEM surpass the
number of available jobs in Australia's current economy \[1\], a new
interdisciplinary field such as cellular agriculture would be a welcome
opportunity for job seekers.

Developing cultivated meat has a number of scientific and technological
challenges. But before cultivated meat products can be found on
supermarket shelves or in restaurants, issues surrounding regulation and
consumer acceptance remain to be resolved. A social license for
cultivated meat that is specific to the Australian context is necessary
for commercial viability. Policy makers, social scientists, and
marketing experts with background knowledge of Australian regulatory
frameworks and consumer behavior will be required to ensure cultivated
meat is not subjected to the same criticisms - and ultimate downfall -
as GMOs.

As with traditional livestock farms, future cultivated meat \"farms\"
will also provide manufacturing jobs in large-scale cell cultivation and
food processing, particularly in regional areas.

Since 2018, three cultured meat companies have been founded in
Australia: [Heuros](/directory/heuros), [VOW](/directory/vow), and, more
recently, [Cass Materials](/directory/cass-materials). Each company
focuses on a different component of the cultivated meat puzzle:
serum-free cell culture media, cell lines, and 3D scaffolds,
respectively.

**So how does Australia compare to the international cellular
agriculture industry?**

According to the [Good Food Institute](/directory/good-food-institute),
a US-based multinational nonprofit organization, 22 companies working on
developing cultivated meat or cellular agriculture technology (such as
bioreactors or biosoftware) have been founded in the US alone since
2015. Israel and the UK tie for second place, each with five companies
working in the sector since 2015 and 2016, respectively \[2\].

Fortunately, R&D within the cellular agriculture industry has been
rapidly expanding in Australia over the past two years, with several
universities jumping in on this massive commercial opportunity.

The [Future Food Hallmark Research
Initiative](https://research.unimelb.edu.au/research-at-melbourne/multidisciplinary-research/hallmark-research-initiatives/future-food)
is a new research collaboration led by the University of Melbourne,
spanning five faculties within the university as well as external
research partners, government, and industry. The Initiative unites
researchers in food policy and regulation, consumer insight, human
health and nutrition, agriculture, food processing, chemistry, and
engineering. This collaborative effort focuses on developing and
producing sustainable, healthy, and affordable protein products,
including plant-based meats and nutritious proteins derived from insects
and algae.

In 2019, the initiative funded several research projects currently
underway. A second round of seed funding for research projects in
2020-2021 will be announced later this year.

**Not if, but when**

The question of whether cellular agriculture will be a major player in
Australia's economy is not a matter of if, but when -- and in what form.
The global demand for protein is increasing significantly and
traditional production will need to be supplemented by non-animal-based
sources \[3\]\[4\]. It's no surprise, then, that the world\'s cultivated
meat market is predicted to grow by US\$200 million during 2020-2024
\[5\]. It's clear Australia can be a leading producer and exporter of
cellular agriculture technologies and high-quality cultivated meat
products akin to Wagyu steaks and Australian grass-fed beef. Otherwise,
we'll rely too heavily on traditional animal agriculture, only to find
ourselves in 10 years\' time dependent on importing alternative protein
products from international markets.

Farming and animal agriculture have been core to every culture around
the world for thousands of years and will continue to be so. Cellular
agriculture isn't a replacement for that, but an addition to our
existing agricultural sector and food industry.

If the goal is to secure the future of Australia's agriculture industry,
then the strategy must be to maximize economic benefits and minimize the
ecological impacts of meat production, while also meeting growing
consumer demand. Collaboration and coexistence between animal
agriculture and cellular agriculture is one way to do that.
Diversification into new protein markets will also allow Australia's
meat industry to maintain global competitiveness, encourage innovation,
and future-proof our food systems. Cellular agriculture also provides
alternatives to omnivores who are environmentally conscious or are
concerned about animal welfare.

Australia has previously struggled with technological changes in energy,
transport, and telecommunications. Just look at the A\$2.2 billion
blow-out of the National Broadband Network \[5\]. The good news is that
the government is currently providing significant funding and
legislative support for agtech and food-tech research, innovation,
investment, and commercialization efforts. Let's make sure we don't fall
behind in this agricultural revolution.

References:

\[1\] A. Patty, "The Sydney Morning Herald," 14 April 2019. \[Online\].
Available:
[https://www.smh.com.au/business/workplace/glut-in-demand-for-science-gr...](https://www.smh.com.au/business/workplace/glut-in-demand-for-science-graduates-challenges-stem-hype-20190327-p517zj.html).
\[Accessed 25 July 2020\].

\[2\] Good Food Institute, "GFI Company Database," 2020. \[Online\].
Available: <https://www.gfi.org/resources.php>. \[Accessed 25 July
2020\].

\[3\] Food Innovation Australia, "Protein Market: Size of the Prize
Analysis for Australia," March 2019. \[Online\]. Available:
<https://fial.com.au/Attachment?Action=Download&Attachment_id=200>.
\[Accessed 25 July 2020\].

\[4\] OECD/FAO, "OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2018-2027, Chapter 1," 3
July 2018. \[Online\]. Available:
[http://www.fao.org/publications/oecd-fao-agricultural-outlook/2018-2027...](http://www.fao.org/publications/oecd-fao-agricultural-outlook/2018-2027/en/).
\[Accessed 25 July 2020\].

\[5\] Technavio, "Cultured Meat Market by Product and Geography -
Forecast and Analysis 2020-2024," Technavio, November 2019. \[Online\].
Available:
<https://www.technavio.com/report/cultured-meat-market-industry-analysis>.
\[Accessed 25 July 2020\].

\[6\] M. Bailey, "NBN Co hopes for enterprise saviour after \$2 billion
blowout," Financial Review, 31 August 2018. \[Online\]. Available:
[https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/nbn-co-hopes-for-enterprise-saviou...](https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/nbn-co-hopes-for-enterprise-saviour-after-2-billion-blowout-20180831-h14rlv).
\[Accessed 25 July 2020\].
