---
title: "Seaweed Aquaculture's Untapped Potential"
date: 2021-10-12 08:33:08
lastmod: 2021-10-12 08:33:08
slug: seaweed-aquacultures-untapped-potential
description: "Seaweed is the collective noun for a group of at least 10,000 species of macroalgae, and new species are being discovered each year. Although seaweeds have been consumed for millennia, they’re increasingly (and rightly) viewed as a hero ingredient. With only half a dozen species cultivated at scale right now, seaweed’s potential for the alt-protein industry is only just starting to unfold."
excerpt: "Seaweed is the collective noun for a group of at least 10,000 species of macroalgae, and new species are being discovered each year. Although seaweeds have been consumed for millennia, they’re increasingly (and rightly) viewed as a hero ingredient. With only half a dozen species cultivated at scale right now, seaweed’s potential for the alt-protein industry is only just starting to unfold."
proteins: [Algae]
products: [Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [International]
flags: [Featured]
directory: [5532, 5605, 6974, 9143]
contributors: [9804]
images: ["seaweedfarm.jpg"]
featured_image: "seaweedfarm.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "Rows of seaweed on a seaweed farm, Jambiani, Zanzibar island, Tanzania. Ventura/Shutterstock.com"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 9805
---
Seaweed aquaculture is the world's [fastest-growing food
sector](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.2017.00100/full),
with its yearly production volume growing at a rate of 8-10%. More
people are discovering that farming seaweed is a viable livelihood, and
the number of its applications is growing as the body of research on its
uses expands into food, feed, fertilizer, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and
nutraceuticals, textiles, pigments, plastics, construction materials,
and more. As the world frantically seeks to decarbonize, seaweeds have
increasingly been touted by scientists and entrepreneurs alike as a
critical piece of the puzzle.

Meanwhile, in the alternative protein space, it's the potential of
*micro*algae that has thus far received the majority of the attention.
These microscopic biological cousins of seaweed (itself a *macro*algae)
are currently being explored by a number of startups working on
[cell-culture
media](https://www.proteinreport.org/nurturing-proteins-algae-and-mycelia)
for cultivated meat, and as ingredients in [plant-based
meat](https://www.foodnavigator-usa.com/Article/2021/09/22/Tofurky-teams-up-with-Triton-Algae-Innovations-for-algae-fueled-meat-innovations-set-to-launch-in-Q1-2022)
products, [animal
feed](https://www.wales247.co.uk/project-reveals-how-algae-could-play-crucial-role-in-sustainable-food-production),
and other [food
applications](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/av/technology-58748128). 

But controlled cultivation of microalgae often requires expensive
facilities with advanced equipment and a highly educated staff to
operate. Seaweed, on the other hand, can be cultivated in open bodies of
water, such as the ocean. Although seaweeds have been consumed for
millennia, they're increasingly (and rightly) viewed as a hero
ingredient. Let's take a closer look at their significant untapped
potential in the alt-protein space. 

**The environmental benefits of seaweed aquaculture**

The foremost (and most self-evident) benefit is that seaweeds grow in
the ocean and so they don't require fertile soil or fresh water to grow
--- both of which are resources in increasingly short supply. 

Notably, seaweeds take up nutrients from the water; no pesticides or
fertilizers need to be added. They can be grown as part of a polyculture
--- with shrimp or salmon farms, for instance, where the seaweeds absorb
the excess nutrients from these animals --- or they can help clean up
the excess fertilizer from agricultural wastewater run-off that washes
into the sea, a process known as bioremediation.

Furthermore, seaweeds are algae, and algae were the original
photosynthesizers before they crawled on land and turned into plants and
trees. This means they take up carbon dioxide. The picture around the
carbon sequestration potential of seaweed aquaculture [will take a bit
longer to form](https://www.oceans2050.com/seaweed) but, at a minimum,
seaweed offers great potential to [decarbonize existing
industries](https://seaweedclimatesolution.com/) by replacing
petroleum-derived products with, for instance,
seaweed-based bioplastics. 

Seaweed farms also provide habitat and a nursery for fish, increasing
biodiversity by 40% and species abundance by 30%, according to [a recent
TNC
study](https://www.globalseafood.org/advocate/tnc-restorative-aquaculture-can-improve-marine-habitats-biodiversity/).
Farms can also serve as a coastal defense, acting as living breakwaters,
which might [help mitigate future flooding
risks](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/raq.12483) as
ocean levels rise.  

Finally, seaweed farming provides income to millions of families in
rural coastal communities in Asia and Africa. [In most developing
countries, the majority of people involved with seaweed farming are
women](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320301776_The_role_of_women_in_seaweed_aquaculture_in_the_Western_Indian_Ocean_and_South-East_Asia),
with men often preferring the fast daily income that fishing brings.
This has enabled women to become economically active and [achieve a
degree of
independence](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09670262.2017.1357084)
and emancipation that was not available to them before, in areas where
few opportunities exist. Further, while initially less lucrative than
daily fishing income due to the steep and often protracted learning
curve involved in farming and cultivation, these "seaweed women"
ultimately enjoy a more stable income which can balance the effects of
fishing's unpredictable outcomes on household finances. 

Wild seaweed stocks do not allow for further growth, meaning seaweed
aquaculture is the only way forward for the industry to grow. For now,
seaweed farming outside Asia is minimal but there is a concerted push to
make [the seaweed industry](https://phyconomy.net/database/) succeed
across the world. Whether it's Australia, Canada, Belize, Brazil,
Norway, or Namibia, pioneering governments, scientists, and
entrepreneurs are looking to build up this new industry.

**Seaweeds in the alternative protein industry**

The ability to extract proteins from seaweed to create drop-in protein
pastes [has been proven in the
lab](https://www.dtu.dk/english/news/2019/03/dynamo-theme-4-from-seaweed-to-proteins)
but is still in its infancy. A look at the graph below from the [Alaska
Seaweed Market
Assessment](https://phyconomy.net/articles/alaskas-fledgling-seaweed-growers-need-to-lower-costs-to-access-new-markets/) report
shows that 2026 is a reasonable aim for this technology to be
commercially ready. 

{{< figure src="seaweed.jpg" alt="market opportunities for seaweed producers" >}}

Pending the development of technologies to commercialize seaweed protein
extracts and concentrates, alternative protein startups have focused on
adding whole seaweed to their products. Trophic, for instance, is about
to come to market with [a bacon replacement made from
dulse](https://grist.org/fix/this-startup-says-seaweed-is-the-secret-to-a-better-faux-burger-and-a-healthier-climate/).

Comfort foods that could benefit from a boost of seaweed's umami profile
are a natural fit and burgers are an obvious starting point for an
alt-protein startup. Started in 2013 as a food truck, [The Dutch Weed
Burger](https://dutchweedburger.com/) was the first company to produce a
soy-based patty enriched with kombu. The company went from food truck
festivals to supermarket shelves and was recently acquired by The
LiveKindly Collective with the intent to scale up and expand beyond its
national borders. Chilean company [Quelp](https://quelp.cl/) has a
similar burger on offer. 

In the US, Akua raised more than \$1M for [its kelp
burger](https://republic.co/akua) through crowdfunding. Meanwhile,
Trophic, the company working on dulse-based bacon, has created a process
for extracting a 65% protein concentrate from red seaweed. [The company
says](https://www.foodnavigator-usa.com/Article/2020/05/22/Trophic-explores-potential-of-red-seaweed-protein-concentrate-as-multi-functional-ingredient-in-plant-based-meat-seafood)
the non-protein substances can be useful ingredients for meat substitute
products by contributing color, flavor, and vitamins. 

Other startups currently in the R&D phase are Born Maverick, [developing
shrimp and scallop replacements from
seaweeds](https://www.newsletter.co.uk/business/consumer/ni-based-company-born-maverick-develops-foods-of-the-future-3368766),
and [Plantruption](https://www.plantruption.com/), also coming out with
a seaweed burger. A company that's instead taking the hybrid route is
Umameats. By adding seaweeds to traditional meat products,
[Umameats](https://umameats.nl/) wants to elevate their taste and
nutritional profile. 

Meanwhile, in the cell-based space, seaweed is being used by Korean
startup [Seawith](http://seawith.net/en/) as scaffolding for its
structured cultivated meat products.

**This is just the start**

Seaweed is the collective noun for a group of at least 10,000 species of
macroalgae, and new ones are being discovered each year. With only half
a dozen species cultivated at scale right now, seaweed's potential for
the alt-protein industry is only just starting to unfold. 

Agriculture has had a 10,000-year head start on sea farming. It's time
for a little catch-up.

*Steven Hermans reports on the emerging seaweed economy at*
[*Phyconomy*](https://phyconomy.net/)*.*
