---
title: "Fighting Food Insecurity with Science: Food Accessibility for All"
date: 2021-11-03 08:55:05
lastmod: 2021-11-03 08:55:05
slug: fighting-food-insecurity-science-food-accessibility-all
description: "This essay is second-place winner of the Student Essay Contest 2021. Eileen McNamara is a Neuroscience PhD Candidate Researcher at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and a Cellular Agriculture Society Fellow."
excerpt: "This essay is second-place winner of the Student Essay Contest 2021. Eileen McNamara is a Neuroscience PhD Candidate Researcher at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and a Cellular Agriculture Society Fellow."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Health, Sci-Tech]
regions: [International]
flags: [NA]
essay_contest: [Second Place]
contributors: [9837]
images: ["eileen_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "eileen_0.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 7000
uuid: 9838
---
***This essay is second-place winner of the [Student Essay Contest
2021](https://www.proteinreport.org/student-essay-contest-2021). Eileen
McNamara is a Neuroscience PhD Candidate Researcher at the Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences and a Cellular Agriculture
Society Fellow.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Hunger**

On a cool spring day, a baby girl is born in a rural town. She is left
in the care of kind strangers at the local orphanage. Although the staff
are well-intentioned, the orphanage is much too crowded. Children cry
from different rooms, wanting to be fed. The caretakers hurriedly walk
down the "assembly line" of infants, giving each baby a spoonful of
food. The food is sparse, bland, and lacking essential ingredients for
growing children. Without intervention, many of these children would not
thrive or may not even survive. About a year later, a loving couple make
the long and tiring journey to the orphanage to adopt the small girl.
When they return home, however, the girl is so lightweight that she
cannot be recorded on the growth chart and needs immediate treatment for
an infection. What if the rural town had enough food for all of its
residents? What if the orphanage was able to provide nutritious and safe
food for all the children? How would having access to healthy food from
a young age change the children's future? Unfortunately this
malnutrition occurs worldwide in similar scenarios, but the promise of
cellular agriculture (CellAg) technology provides hope that someday this
hunger will not be felt by others.

Fast-forward a couple of decades and the same girl is grateful to be
writing to you now, remarkably as a happy and healthy adult, but faces a
new challenge alongside the rest of the world---a global pandemic. This
time, however, I am in a more fortunate situation, but cannot help
feeling sympathetic towards the many families now facing hunger and
waiting in long food bank lines. Seeing these never-ending food lines
amplified the call-to-action to help find a solution, leading me to
CellAg. I quickly became incorporated into the Cellular Agriculture
Society (CAS) as a lead author for the Humanity chapter focusing on six
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, including Zero Hunger, of
the forthcoming CAS cellular agriculture textbook (Gasteratos, 2022) and
created an ongoing CellAg and food security project through the CAS
fellowship program. As a scientist, CellAg presents the perfect
opportunity to combine both of my passions: to fight food insecurity
with science.

The pandemic exposed several weaknesses that CellAg can help strengthen.
My project aims to provide a roadmap for CellAg distribution so that as
many people as possible can benefit from this revolutionary technology,
which could be a valuable tool in impoverished communities to combat
food insecurity.

**Food Insecurity Research**

An estimated 840 million people will face hunger by 2030, which has been
accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic (FAO *et al*., 2020; Feeding
America). Food security as defined by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations is "a situation that exists when all
people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access to
sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and
food preferences for an active and healthy life," which consists of four
main components: availability, access, utilization, and stability (FAO
*et al.*, 2020; Feeding America).

The first factor, availability, relates to food production and the
amount of food present for consumption. CellAg offers a new method of
generating food that could increase yield faster than traditional
farming and reduce agricultural waste. Even countries with food
surpluses, however, still suffer from high rates of food insecurity,
demonstrating that addressing the other aspects of food security is
essential (Hagedorn, 2019; McMichael, 2000).

The second factor, access, involves both geographic and economic
distribution. CellAg may enable physical access to remote areas since
cultivated meat is expected to have a longer shelf life than
conventional meat. Shelf-stable, cell-based products could be made and
transported farther away from consumers or alternatively the CellAg
technology could be brought directly to locations that historically rely
on imported food, creating more geographical independence (Gasteratos,
2019; Hagedorn, 2019; Santo *et al.*, 2020). Many countries favor
independence and are investing in technology to secure their food supply
chains, a lesson also highlighted by the pandemic (Turrell, 2021).
Economic accessibility will depend on price as expense continues to
challenge CellAg, but if scaled properly cell-based meat may provide
cheaper prices than conventional meat. In this case, farmed meat would
become a premium product instead of CellAg items (Santo *et al.*, 2020).
If costs continue to decrease, then it is estimated that cultivated meat
will reach conventional meat price parity by 2030 and can operate more
sustainably than current farming methods (Brennan *et al*., 2021; Sinke
and Odegard, 2021).

The third factor, utilization, describes the food's nutritional value.
Malnourishment, a metric for food insecurity, often involves "a lack of
protein rather than a lack of calories" (De Boer and Aiking, 2011).
Global malnutrition frequently occurs in low income countries that rely
heavily on staple foods instead of on fresh produce and animal products
(FAO *et al.*, 2020). The demand for meat is increasing within more
developing countries and as the human population grows. By 2050, the
world population is estimated to increase to about 10 billion people
(FAO *et al.*, 2020; Hagedorn, 2019). Cell-based meat could possess
identical or even enhanced nutritional values, such as healthy fat
substitutions, compared to conventional meat or plant-based proteins
(Day, 2013; Gasteratos, 2019; Santo *et al.*, 2020). Overall food
production closer to the communities it serves would also increase
utilization by providing fresher and healthier, less processed food,
which is a current obstacle for food deserts. Food insecurity in food
desert neighborhoods is sometimes combated with access to one grocery
store or even food sent via mail, but the available foods are processed,
non-perishable, and expensive to transport (Fogarty, 2021). CellAg may
offer fresh, healthy protein that would otherwise be too difficult to
deliver to remote areas.

The final factor, stability, indicates the reliability of the food
system. Food security encompasses additional issues, such as
environmental sustainability and aspects of public health with food
safety. With dwindling land availability, CellAg would be less dependent
on natural resources and less vulnerable to climate change than
conventional farming and could enable stability during natural and
man-made disasters (Gasteratos, 2019; Hagedorn, 2019). Public health
concerns, such as foodborne illnesses and zoonotic diseases, could be
diminished through CellAg's sterile production environment, further
contributing to a stable long-term food system and possibly reduce the
risk of future pandemics.

While all four factors are critical to comprehensive food security, as
identified by others, food distribution appears to lie at the heart of
the current food security problem (Hagedorn, 2019; McLellan, 2020).
Geopolitical concerns surround the distribution of CellAg products and
technology. Some essential questions about CellAg distribution include
whether it will be centralized or decentralized and whether it will
create a potential disparity that benefits only urban areas at the
expense of rural communities (Hagedorn, 2019; Stephens *et al.*, 2018).

Researchers predict CellAg to impact urban and rural communities
differently. If CellAg is produced in cities, urban areas could benefit
from increased food availability, nutrition, and economic advantages.
Rural regions may benefit from reduced climate pollution caused by
conventional farming, but may also suffer from job and community loss
related to local agriculture displacement (Hagedorn, 2019; Santo *et
al.*, 2020). Mass unemployment of farmers could lead to poverty and
ironically food insecurity for the same people who have historically
supplied food for communities. Collaboration instead of competition with
farmers to establish regulation policies to prevent unemployment by
transferring job skills could mitigate some of these potential negative
aspects (Hagedorn, 2019; Santo *et al.*, 2020).

The disparity between urban and rural areas in the implementation of
CellAg may also be extended globally. CellAg could increase the already
existing economic and political power imbalance and allow for developed
countries to monopolize power (Hocquette, 2016; Santo *et al.*, 2020). A
shared united goal to advance CellAg, however, may promote
unconventional collaborations with a unified mission (Clarkson, 2021).
Designing "cookie-cutter" production facilities could aid in widespread
distribution by providing quick, easy-to-build framework. Expansion of
CellAg infrastructure may extend to developing communities, increasing
resource access. Other research, such as generating meat for astronauts
in outer space, may overlap and provide the technology needed to enable
CellAg production in remote areas on earth as well. Widespread
sharing---and democratization---of CellAg could reduce the concern of
equal distribution of the technology (Brennan *et al*., 2021; Clarkson,
2021; Gasteratos, 2019; Shojinmeat Project).

**CellAg and Food Security Project**

My research interest is how CellAg can change food distribution for
impoverished communities with the ultimate goal of providing food
accessibility to all. The aim of my project is to compare and contrast
different CellAg distribution models and to identify designs most
promising to alleviate food insecurity. I hypothesize that
decentralized, open-access, and democratized CellAg distribution will
provide the greatest opportunity for CellAg to reduce food insecurity.

The different distribution strategies to be studied include centralized,
semi-centralized, and decentralized:

A couple of centralized models have already broken ground and are under
construction as pilot production plants with one company announcing that
over 1,000 pounds of meat can be generated in one day. Other companies
have envisioned plans to start building soon (Albrecht, 2021; Martin,
2021; "Our pilot plant," 2021). The Cellular Agriculture Society's
Cell-based Meat Facility (CMF) project has created an ambitious
blueprint of a potential plant in New York City to provide 2 billion
pounds of meat annually ("Project CMF," 2021; Talks at Google, 2019).
Another large facility based on data from 15 current CellAg and
industry-related companies is described as producing about 60,400 pounds
of minced meat daily and creating 200 jobs with cost competitive and
more environmentally friendly procedures compared to conventional meat
operations (Sinke and Odegard, 2021; Vergeer, Sinke, and Odegard, 2021).
Other cultured meat factories have also been designed and one highly
detailed architectural project, The Carnery, describes a centralized
area for CellAg production, education, research, and restaurant
(Dunsford, 2020; Whiteside, 2017). The Carnery is portrayed as an urban
hub in Dorchester, United Kingdom, that uses a closed energy system with
recycled waste and solar, water, and electric power. In addition to the
structural facilities for CellAg production, museum, and restaurant, The
Carnery campus has space for an algae orchard and incorporated vertical
farming. The Carnery is estimated to yield about 150 pounds of meat per
day (Whiteside, 2017). The centralized models generally contain a cell
production and harvesting process (tissue culturing, media growth in
large bioreactors, scaffolding or 3D printing station), packaging area,
and distribution center.

The semi-centralized models include a Cellular Agriculture Lifecycle Pod
and pigs-in-the-backyard design. The pod is described as a
solar-operated, net-zero-carbon, walk-through unit that produces food
for the local community and acts as a social hub. The pod is a condensed
version of the larger centralized plants equipped with small
bioreactors, product processing, and drying room (Byrd, 2018). The
pigs-in-the-backyard model could include small farms with a few animals
that assist with the initial cell collection for the start of CellAg
production at a local CellAg facility, such as a cultured meat barn
(Dunsford, 2020; van der Weele and Driessen, 2013). The
pigs-in-the-backyard strategy could also be utilized in crowded urban
areas without much space (Shojinmeat Project).

Decentralized designs consist of individualized CellAg production. The
Renaissance Farm manufacturing system is a hybrid between the
semi-centralized and decentralized designs. The Renaissance Farm concept
is similar to a CellAg vending machine where a food production device
can be individually installed. The machine could then be maintained by
the Food-as-Software idea in which different food formulas are
downloaded from a central database (Scialom, 2021; Tubb and Seba, 2019).
Other strategies for individualized CellAg include personalized CellAg
kitchen devices and do-it-yourself online instructions from an
open-access database (Dunsford, 2020; Shojinmeat Project). Individual
meal packets, such as meals-ready-to-eat for the military or for
astronauts, could also provide technology for
individualized distribution.

Experts in both the CellAg and hunger relief fields will be surveyed
with a standardized questionnaire to evaluate the different distribution
models, including a scoring system for how helpful the designs may be
for alleviating food insecurity. Since different models may work for
different locations, regional experts will also be selected from
impoverished areas to offer insight about how various distribution
strategies might assist their communities. Based on the questionnaire
data, the final objective of this study is to provide a blueprint for a
CellAg model(s) that would best reduce food insecurity.

Food security encompasses numerous dimensions, particularly public
policy and consumer acceptance. Policy surrounding CellAg will be key to
ensuring equal distribution and smooth operation of CellAg facilities.
Knowledge of local laws and culture can strengthen policy by customizing
CellAg implementation for the target community, which may ultimately
determine the success of a new food strategy (Guinto, 2021). Other
challenges that contribute to food insecurity include poverty, poor
health, and lack of housing (Martin, 2021). Successful food banks offer
a central hub that address several needs, such as employment and health
counsel to combat holistic sources of food insecurity, not just
providing food ("How big food banks are defining the pantry of the
future", 2021). In addition to understanding the origins of food
insecurity, effective food banks also foster consumer trust.
Transparency and food choice are needed to establish consumer acceptance
(Fogarty, 2021; The Good Food Institute, 2021; "How big food banks are
defining the pantry of the future", 2021). Food is personal, so research
related to the people who will be eating the food and work towards
alleviating interrelated issues are also critical to successfully
strengthening food security.

Although food security is a multifaceted problem with no single
solution, CellAg presents an opportunity to address some of the key
challenges related to distribution to impoverished communities. This
project will provide a roadmap for CellAg distribution that will
facilitate the human right to food and reduce the risk of unequal
distribution. Food is fundamental to life, as partially illustrated by
my personal experience alongside my peers at the orphanage. Perhaps
CellAg can play a significant role in providing this basic need to more
people in the future and perhaps my work can aid in preventing other
cases of childhood hunger, paying forward my good fortune.

 

**References**

Albrecht, Chris. "Avant Meat announces new R&D and pilot manufacturing
facilities in Singapore." The Spoon, 26 April 2021.
<https://thespoon.tech/avant-meats-announces-new-rd-and-pilot-manufacturing-facilities-in-singapore/>

Brennan, Tom, et al. "Cultivated meat: out of the lab, into the frying
pan." McKinsey & Company, 16 June 2021.
<https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/agriculture/our-insights/cultivated-meat-out-of-the-lab-into-the-frying-pan>

Byrd, Emily. "Cellular agriculture: a global food-security solution."
The Good Food Institute, 15 March 2018.
<https://gfi.org/blog/cellular-agriculture-a-global-food-security/>

Dunsford, Illtud Llyr. "Cellular agriculture Ltd; cultured meat and its
industrial future at Nemo Science Museum, Amsterdam." YouTube, 10
January 2020. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=chlGzl6zHNA>

Clarkson, Emma. "Is Cultivated Meat the Answer to Peace in the Middle
East?" Plantbased Business Hour, 10 February 2021.
<https://vegconomist.com/plantbased-business-hour/is-cultivated-meat-the-answer-to-peace-in-the-middle-east/>

Day, Li. "Proteins from land plants--potential resources for human
nutrition and food security." *Trends in Food Science & Technology* 32.1
(2013): 25-42.

De Boer, Joop, and Harry Aiking. "On the merits of plant-based proteins
for global food security: Marrying macro and micro perspectives."
*Ecological economics* 70.7 (2011): 1259-1265.

FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO. 2020. *The State of Food Security and
Nutrition in the World 2020*. *Transforming food systems for affordable
healthy diets*. Rome, FAO. <https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9692en>

Feeding America. Accessed 17 September 2021.
<https://www.feedingamerica.org/hunger-in-america/food-insecurity>

Fogarty, Mark. "Mailing food and other solutions to rural hunger." Food
Bank News Strategy, 18 February 2021.
<https://foodbanknews.org/mailing-food-and-other-solutions-to-rural-hunger/>

Gasteratos, Kristopher. "90 Reasons to Consider Cellular
Agriculture." 2019.

Gasteratos, Kristopher (ed.). *Cellular Agriculture: Developing Animal
Products with Animal Cells*. Elsevier Science, anticipated 15 July 2022.

The Good Food Institute. "Dr. Marianne Ellis: designing large-scale
bioreactors and bioprocesses for cultivated meat." YouTube, 25 March
2021. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_9HwoIpNuCM>

Guinto, Rodalyn. "What can synthetic biology do better to help end
hunger?" SynbioBeta, 17 February 2021.
<https://synbiobeta.com/how-can-synthetic-biology-do-better-to-help-end-hunger/>

Hagedorn, Clara. "The impact of clean meat on global food security: a
qualitative study." Nottingham Trent University, 2019.

Hocquette, Jean-François. "Is in vitro meat the solution for the
future?" *Meat science* 120 (2016): 167-176.

"How big food banks are defining the pantry of the future." Food Bank
News Food Pantries, 8 December 2020.
<https://foodbanknews.org/how-big-food-banks-are-defining-the-pantry-of-the-future/>

Martin, Katie S. *Reinventing Food Banks and Pantries: New Tools to End
Hunger*. Island Press, 2021.

Martin, Noga. "5,000 burgers a day: world's first cultured
meat-production plant opens in Israel." Jewish News Syndicate, 24 June
2021.
<https://www.jns.org/5000-burgers-a-day-worlds-first-cultured-meat-production-plant-opens-in-israel/>

McLellan, Mike. "Biotechnology, cellular agriculture, and the right to
food." New Harvest, 29 July 2020.
<https://new-harvest.org/why-government-must-embrace-cellular-agriculture-food-security/>

McMichael, Philip. "The power of food." *Agriculture and human values*
17.1 (2000): 21-33.

"Our pilot plant." Wildtype. Accessed 17 September 2021.
<https://www.wildtypefoods.com/our-salmon#pilot-plant>

"Project CMF (Cell-based Meat Facility)." The Cellular Agriculture
Society. Accessed 17 September 2021.
<https://www.cellag.org/work/project-cmf/>

Santo, Raychel E., et al. "Considering plant-based meat substitutes and
cell-based meats: A public health and food systems perspective."
*Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems* 4 (2020): 134.

Scialom, Mike. "Cambridge start-up's bio-reactor means cultured meat
will be made anywhere." Cambridge Independent, July 13, 2021.
<https://www.cambridgeindependent.co.uk/business/cambridge-start-up-s-bio-reactor-means-cultured-meat-will-be-9207118/>

Shojinmeat Project. Accessed 17 September 2021.
<https://shojinmeat.com/wordpress/en/>

Sinke, Pelle, and Ingrid Odegard. "LCA of cultivated meat: future
projections for different scenarios." CE Delft, February 2021.
<https://cedelft.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2021/04/CE_Delft_190107_LCA_of_cultivated_meat_Def.pdf>

Stephens, Neil, et al. "Bringing cultured meat to market: Technical,
socio-political, and regulatory challenges in cellular agriculture."
*Trends in Food Science & Technology* 78 (2018): 155-166.

Talks at Google. "A vision for meat production in 2040: Kris
Gasteratos." YouTube, 26 August 2019.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q6xQWavrByQ>

Tubb, Catherine, and Tony Seba. "Rethinking Food and Agriculture
2020-2030: The Second Domestication of Plants and Animals, the
Disruption of the Cow, and the Collapse of Industrial Livestock
Farming." *RethinkX* (2019)*.*
<https://www.rethinkx.com/food-and-agriculture>

Turrell, Claire. "Singapore turns to cultured meat to boost its food
security." Life and Thyme, 26 February 2021.
<https://lifeandthyme.com/food/singapore-turns-to-cultured-meat-to-boost-its-food-security/>

Van der Weele, Cor, and Clemens Driessen. "Emerging profiles for
cultured meat; ethics through and as design." *Animals* 3.3
(2013): 647-662.

Vergeer, R., Sinke, P., and Odegard, I. "TEA of cultivated meat: future
projections of different scenarios." CE Delft, February 2021.
<https://cedelft.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2021/04/CE_Delft_190254_TEA_of_Cultivated_Meat_Def.pdf>

Whiteside, Chris. "The Carnery." University of Bath (2017). Accessed 19
September 2021. <http://www.chriswhiteside.com/the-carnery>
