---
title: "MicroHarvest announces strategic partnership with Simon Capital to accelerate path to commercialization"
date: 2023-05-05 09:18:38
lastmod: 2023-05-05 09:18:38
slug: microharvest-announces-strategic-partnership-simon-capital-accelerate-path
company: 11296
description: "Strategic partnership will provide MicroHarvest with invaluable expertise, accelerating the scale-up and manufacturing of its award-winning sustainable protein"
excerpt: "Strategic partnership will provide MicroHarvest with invaluable expertise, accelerating the scale-up and manufacturing of its award-winning sustainable protein"
proteins: [Microbial]
products: [Pet Food, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Europe]
flags: [Press Release, Investments]
directory: [698, 700, 5660, 7553, 11296]
images: ["MicroHarvest team at their new Lisbon office.jpg"]
featured_image: "MicroHarvest team at their new Lisbon office.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "MicroHarvest team at their new Lisbon office."
draft: false
uuid: 11308
---
-   Strategic partnership will provide MicroHarvest with invaluable
    expertise, accelerating the scale-up and manufacturing of its
    award-winning sustainable protein
-   New investment brings total funding raised by MicroHarvest to over
    EUR 10M
-   Announcement of partnership with Simon Capital coincides with the
    launch of new Lisbon office on May 4th, marking a significant
    milestone in journey towards commercialization

**Lisbon, May 5th 2023 --** Award-winning agrifoodtech start-up,
[MicroHarvest](https://microharvest.com/), a leading biotech company on
a mission to champion the protein ingredients of the future, has
announced a new partnership with Simon Capital. The partnership will
strengthen the teams' operational know-how within the food and
production space and bring in additional funds to fuel the company's
growth. 

After successfully closing a EUR 8.5M Series A financing round last
September, led by Astanor Ventures, FoodLabs, Happiness Capital and
Faber, MicroHarvest has raised EUR 1.5M from new investment partner
Simon Capital.

**Katelijne Bekers, MicroHarvest Co-Founder & CEO**, commented on the
announcement: "Choosing the partnership with Simon Capital will bring a
significant long-term edge to the growth of MicroHarvest. Simon Capital
doesn't just bring extra funding: through them, we gain access to an
incredibly experienced team who understands the ins and outs of a
manufacturing company in the food & beverage space. We share a
result-oriented mindset and are purpose-driven, with the bold ambition
of building a resilient food system. I believe this combination of
operational and cultural match is what makes this partnership a critical
milestone for our company's success.''

The investment, which will bring the total funding into the
Hamburg-and-Lisbon-based start-up to over EUR 10M, will allow the
company to work towards key commercialization milestones. As part of its
efforts to enter the market by the end of 2023, the company is building
a pilot plant at its new location in Lisbon. This plant will enable them
to produce prototypes and accelerate research, as production is being
ramped up together with a contract manufacturing partner.

**Dr. Friedrich Droste, Managing Partner at Simon Capital**, adds: "We
are excited to join the MicroHarvest team on their mission to combine
best-in-class research know-how and operational expertise for reshaping
the B2B protein ingredients industry, by unlocking the full potential of
microorganisms. It is impressive to see what the team has built-up in
the last months on its path to improving the resilience of tomorrow's
food system and, in addition, driving impact for more sustainable
consumption. Simon Capital is looking forward to working closely
together with the team and a renowned set of investors."

MicroHarvest operates within the rapidly accelerating sector of
fermentation-enabled protein, which saw an investment increase of 37% in
Europe in 2022, according to The Good Food Institute data. The
company\'s proprietary technology, based on biomass fermentation,
enables production at a speed and efficiency that far exceeds other
existing approaches. The result is quality protein ingredients
containing over 60% raw protein, which can be produced in 24 hours from
input to output, requiring a fraction of the water and land needed for
other commercially available alternatives. Applications along the whole
protein value chain of B2B ingredients are manifold, ranging from animal
feed to direct application in food and pet food. 

In its first two years of operation, MicroHarvest has already reached
remarkable milestones, including receiving the prestigious BloombergNEF
Pioneers Awards for their low-carbon response to alternative protein and
demonstrating a significant potential of speed to market. Over the past
12 months, they've successfully scaled to a production rate of 300
kilograms (661 pounds) per day and conducted tests on shrimp feed, which
yielded encouraging results.

**About Microharvest **

MicroHarvest is a biotechnology company that produces sustainable
proteins through microbial fermentation, using agricultural byproducts
as feedstock. Their proprietary technology allows them to produce
protein ingredients much faster and using significantly less water and
space compared to animal or plant-derived ingredients. The dried biomass
is then combined with other ingredients to make food products, with
applications ranging from feed to pet food and human food.  

The company was founded in April 2021 and is led by CEO Katelijne
Bekers, Executive MBA with a background in biotechnology, CTO Luisa Cruz
PhD, bringing over 10 years leading R&D roles and COO Jonathan Roberz,
an experienced entrepreneur who has already successfully built and
exited a technology start-up. 

Their ambition is to boldly push technological boundaries in the
ingredients industry to drive impact across the whole protein value
chain. 

<https://microharvest.com/> 

**About Simon Capital**

Simon Capital is an early-stage VC firm with a Seed/Series A funds
volume of 105 M€ investing in mission driven founders and companies that
identify the needs of their customers with innovative business models
and disrupting product solutions to shape a better and sustainable
future for the next generation. Fka Bitburger Ventures, the VC firm has
been investing in three investment verticals: Consumption (waterdrop,
share, Just Spices), Wellbeing (Sanity Group, Hello Inside, OC
Hairsystems) and Productivity (Magaloop, Ordio). Within these verticals,
Simon Capital has been investing in disruptive Food-/Bio-Tech ventures
e.g., Mushlabs (Meat), Fermify (Dairy), Wild Earth (Pet Food), and
Mighty Drinks (Milk). Simon Capital makes use of its powerful network
and expertise rooted in an entrepreneurial family heritage supporting
its portfolio companies actively beyond investing to lift new
generations of sustainable businesses.

<https://www.simoncapital.com>
