---
title: "Feeding Millions by the Touch of a Button"
date: 2021-11-03 08:55:10
lastmod: 2021-11-03 08:55:10
slug: feeding-millions-touch-button
description: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 runner-up. Keerthana Reddy is a master’s degree student in Mechanical and Materials Engineering at University of Nebraska–Lincoln. Tasneem Bouzid, PhD student in Mechanical and Materials Engineering at University of Nebraska–Lincoln, also contributed to this essay."
excerpt: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 runner-up. Keerthana Reddy is a master’s degree student in Mechanical and Materials Engineering at University of Nebraska–Lincoln. Tasneem Bouzid, PhD student in Mechanical and Materials Engineering at University of Nebraska–Lincoln, also contributed to this essay."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Health, Sci-Tech]
regions: [International]
flags: [NA]
essay_contest: [Runner-up]
contributors: [9836]
images: ["KR_0.jpeg"]
featured_image: "KR_0.jpeg"
draft: false
weight: 9000
uuid: 9835
---
***This is a [Student Essay Contest
2021](https://www.proteinreport.org/student-essay-contest-2021) runner-up.
Keerthana Reddy is a master's degree student in Mechanical and Materials
Engineering at University of Nebraska--Lincoln. Tasneem Bouzid, PhD
student in Mechanical and Materials Engineering at University of
Nebraska--Lincoln, also contributed to this essay.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In many cultures, food presents a form of love and care and a way to
bring people closer. This very personal relationship we have with food
differentiates us from other living organisms for whom food just serves
as a source of nutrition. However, in countries that suffer from food
scarcity and famines, using food as comfort is often a luxury. In such
developing communities, food security means economic growth, long-term
health, and comfort. Food insecurity has detrimental effects on multiple
aspects of the society.

Having reliable access to safe and nutritious food is a basic human
need, which is why "Zero Hunger" is listed as a second goal by the
United Nations (UN) under Sustainable Development Goals Initiative
\[1\]. According to the UN, 2.37 billion people in the world do not have
access to a healthy balanced diet in 2020 \[2\]. The global pandemic has
only worsened this situation. An estimated 12.9% of the hungry
population are from developing countries (Fig. 1). Entomologists
determined that the high rate of population growth relative to
agricultural productivity of a country, pest attacks, low capacity to
store food products, low capacity to buy food staples from other
sources, and climate change were among the leading causes for increased
world hunger \[3\].

Many international organizations like the World Food Program (WFP), one
of the largest UN agencies, is helping feed millions of people around
the world. Meanwhile, smaller groups like The Hunger Project work to
fight poverty and hunger in Asia, Africa, and South America. The Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation works towards food fortification and
provides nutritious meals to Sub-Saharan African population. Even though
they work in different places around the world, these organizations are
united by a common goal: to eradicate hunger and make nutritious meals
accessible to everyone. Despite these organizations working to reduce
hunger, the world has seen a rise in hungry people in the past year
owning to climate change and the pandemic. As stated by FAO, the
prevalence of undernourishment climbed to 9.9% in 2020, which is up from
8.4% one year earlier \[2\]. This rise is not just because of the
unavailability of food, it is also largely dependent on the
affordability. Making food accessible and affordable has never been
more crucial.

Food assistance programs need to not only focus on food security, but
also nutrition security. Poor nutritional diet is a common cause of many
chronic diseases, such as diabetes and heart disease. A balanced and
healthy diet includes a mixture of proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and
other macronutrients. Protein intake plays an important role in the
well-being of humans, especially children. Micronutrient deficiency is a
commonly associated with a lack of balanced nutrition. This is seen more
in developing countries than in developed nations. Increasing protein
production to meet the demands of a growing population and making it
available and affordable remains a challenge. This production demand is
impeded by several threats ranging from deforestation and biodiversity
loss to pandemics and antimicrobial resistance. Against the complexity
and uncertainty of this situation, one thing remains clear: time to find
a solution is running out.

Fig. 1. Representation of a hungry population around the world.
Coefficient of Variation is a measure of the average meals a person
consumes, the higher the variation, the higher is the population that
remains hungry at a particular location \[1,2,4\]

The rapidly evolving science of cellular agriculture offers the
possibility to solve many of the world's protein-related dilemmas within
a timeframe not otherwise on the table. However, realizing its promise
will require overcoming barriers at the technical, policy, economic, and
sociocultural levels. Consumer acceptance remains a major challenge in
the implementation of cellular agriculture. The lack of consumer support
stems from the emotions associated with the traditional methods of
making food. Food neophobia is a major cause of non-acceptance of
cultured meat among young adults. Increased acceptance of food largely
depends on its affordability and organoleptic properties. Any new food
innovation on the market needs to appeal to consumers in both ways.

To overcome the obstacle of price and increase consumer confidence in
alternative methods of nutrition, my research focuses on developing meat
products that meet or surpass traditional meat in cost, taste,
availability, and quality. We apply engineering principles, specifically
the controlling of mechanical and thermal behavior to produce innovative
scaffolds. These scaffold designs are tuned to exhibit desired traits by
modifying their shape and material properties. Currently, we are
designing scaffolds that show negative thermal expansion to mimic the
traditional behavior of shrinking meat during cooking. These polymer
scaffolds are then used to manufacture 'smart meat'. Why 'smart' though?
Because it opens the possibility of having the right set of nutrients in
a single product to fulfill dietary requirements. 'Smart,' because it
would taste, look and feel like meat, but would be manufactured using
cultured cells instead of slaughtered animals. 'Smart,' because we
modify the materials and the contents to suit specific needs, ensuring
balanced nutrition. Another way I am addressing food wastage is by
ensuring that "smart meat" retains moisture for longer under heat to
prevent overcooking. This is done by regulating the heat transfer in the
meat product. We will study different biopolymers that can be used to
culture meat and allow heat transfer within the meat to be controlled.
These polymers will then be used to design scaffolds that exhibit a
negative thermal expansion, i.e. they shrink when the temperature
increases, just like how meat shrinks when cooked. Cultured meat that
looks, feels, tastes, and cooks like regular meat is known as 'smart
meat'. The goal of this research is to make cultured meat attractive to
consumers and reduce the hassle that goes into cooking a perfect piece
of meat every single time. By improving consumer acceptance, the social
stigma surrounding cultured meat is reduced. Increased acceptance leads
to higher investments and eventually improved innovations and increased
production. As demand and production increase, increased availability of
cultured meat will reduce the current cost.

The second obstacle to overcome with my research is the affordability of
cultured meat products. The manufacturing cost of the first ever
cultured meat hamburger was \$300,000 USD. Currently, the first
commercially available lab-grown chicken nuggets are sold for \$18 USD
in Singapore by Just Eat. For someone in Australia, where the per capita
income is \$54,420, this price might not seem a lot, but when you look
at it from the perspective of someone in Burundi, Africa earning a
meager wage of \$280, it is unaffordable. An efficient method of
manufacturing can reduce the cost of a product significantly. To
manufacture cultured meat products, we first look at the various methods
of achieving the final cultured meat product. The infamous 'Test-Tube
Hamburger' was made by combining hundreds of tiny little muscle fibers
formed in a large bioreactor \[5\]. The muscle cells multiplied in a
bioreactor to spontaneously fuse and form long fibers. This fusion
allowed muscle cells to align in a directional manner like regular meat
tissue. Another method of making cultured meat would be to use a
foundational structure, or a scaffold, on which the muscle cells grow
and align themselves. By using a scaffold, we eliminate the requirement
of increasing the number of muscle cells required for spontaneous fiber
formation. This spontaneity is assisted by the scaffold, where you add
some muscle cells, allow them to grow, multiply and finally form the
directional structure. The shape and design of the meat product can be
modified by the scaffold structure. This also enables us to control the
properties of the final product. Moreover, the scaffold materials can be
modified to include all of the essential micronutrients to enhance
muscle cell growth.

My research will aim to contribute to the overall goal of manufacturing
affordable cultured meat by using cheaper alternatives for scaffold
manufacturing. Traditionally, scaffolds are manufactured using
extrusion, ink-jet printing, additive manufacturing, and chemical
processing. These methods are time-consuming and expensive. We did an
extensive survey of all available methods and additive manufacturing
emerged as an economical method to fabricate scaffolds. Additive
manufacturing is a fast and customizable method that is now being
popularized for printing food. For the ease of accessibility, we used a
commercially available benchtop printer to manufacture edible scaffolds
to culture cells and grow meat tissue. The benchtop printer uses Digital
Light Projection (DLP) method for printing, which uses an LED source to
excite the scaffold material. The scaffold will include a
light-sensitive chemical that causes the scaffold to solidify and form a
rigid structure when excited. From this research, we aim to show that
the manufacturing of cultured meat doesn't require extensive lab spaces
and equipment, and that it can be easy and accessible to everyone.

Fig. 2. Schematic of the proposed one-step process.

To fulfill the overarching goal of making meat at the touch of a button,
we hope to bring a meat-printing machine to every household. The aim is
to integrate and automate the whole process of manufacturing meat into a
single tabletop machine. To elaborate, imagine an all-in-one minifridge-
sized machine that includes storage, a manufacturing plant, and a
processing plant. All one needs to do is pick the meat of choice and
press a button. The machine will do the rest. This meatprinting machine
will have an inventory of cells, scaffolds, and cell culture materials.
It will then make the scaffold, seed the desired cells, and culture them
in a built-in incubator. Processed material stock and the meat would
remain in the incubator and the user would need regularly stock up on
the raw materials just as one picks up groceries. Since all of the
processes are done in a single machine, the risk of contamination
is minimal.

A meat-making machine seems far-fetched in a broader view; however, it
can be achieved by making science accessible to everyone. Setting up
local cell banks that keep their cell lines growing and healthy, local
stores that sell scaffold materials, and educating people on how to
efficiently use these machines would help make cultured meat available
to every household. Any improvement or changes to the machine can easily
be shared with the world, removing all barriers that exist with food
storage and exportation. This innovation potentially limits the demand
on our existing agricultural systems to feed the growing population by
offering an alternative method of balanced nutrition. With this drop-in
demand, the current agricultural systems have reduced pressure to
produce more food.

Food, as we know not just fills our stomach, but it fills our soul. Food
is comfort, food is memory, food is culture, and food is pleasure. As
humans, we are meant to enjoy every morsel we eat. However, when a large
part of the population struggles to find food, enjoyment becomes a
privilege. To end this disparity, many people and organizations are
doing their part. Cultured meat is one innovative way for researchers
and scientists to help with eliminating food inequality. Let's aim to
make science accessible, affordable, and attractive to solve the
problems of food security in the modern world.

**References**

\[1\] United Nations, Sustainable Development goals \[2\] Food and
Agricultural Organization, State of food security-nutrition \[3\] Zakka,
Usman, and Luke C. Nwosu. "Global war on hunger and current research on
the roles of world entomologists in enhancing food security." Journal of
Agricultural Science and Food Technology 5 (2019): 15-25. \[4\] Our
World in Data, coefficient of variation in per capita caloric intake
\[5\] Growing meat, MosaMeat ,<https://mosameat.com/growing-beef>
