---
title: "Cultivated Abundance: The man who saved a billion lives"
date: 2020-04-07 15:25:13
lastmod: 2020-04-07 15:25:13
slug: cultivated-abundance-man-who-saved-billion-lives
description: "In an eponymous book published in 1968, Stanford University Professor Paul R. Ehrlich noted that the rate of population growth would outpace agricultural production, leading to widespread famine and subsequent suffering in the 1970s and 1980s. Many now look back at that prediction and shame it as another example of fear-mongering about a Malthusian catastrophe that has been often repeated throughout history but never come to pass. This post comes from my upcoming book, Cultivated Abundance, which will be published by New Degree Press in July 2020."
excerpt: "In an eponymous book published in 1968, Stanford University Professor Paul R. Ehrlich noted that the rate of population growth would outpace agricultural production, leading to widespread famine and subsequent suffering in the 1970s and 1980s. Many now look back at that prediction and shame it as another example of fear-mongering about a Malthusian catastrophe that has been often repeated throughout history but never come to pass. This post comes from my upcoming book, Cultivated Abundance, which will be published by New Degree Press in July 2020."
proteins: [Plant-Based]
products: [NA]
topics: [Business, Sci-Tech]
regions: [International]
flags: [Book Excerpt, Featured]
contributors: [8112]
images: ["wheat_polina-rytova-1dGMs4hhcVA-unsplash.jpg"]
featured_image: "wheat_polina-rytova-1dGMs4hhcVA-unsplash.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 6618
---
**This post comes from my upcoming book, Cultivated Abundance, which
will be published by New Degree Press in July 2020. You can pre-order a
copy of the book and join an exclusive group of beta readers at [this
link](https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/cultivated-abundance-by-mihir-pershad).**

Just as World War II came to a close, the world found itself facing a
new threat: the "Population Bomb". In an eponymous book published in
1968, Stanford University Professor Paul R. Ehrlich noted that the rate
of population growth would outpace agricultural production, leading to
widespread famine and subsequent suffering in the 1970s and 1980s. Many
now look back at that prediction and shame it as another example of
fear-mongering about a Malthusian catastrophe that has been often
repeated throughout history but never come to pass. The problem with
these critiques in retrospect is that they assume it was rational to
expect events to occur in the way they did to prevent the catastrophe.
Essentially, claiming that concerns about a wide-spread famine were
unfounded would only be logical if it was highly probable that the
events that prevented that famine would occur as they did.

In fact, the events that prevented mass famine and starvation were
anything but probable. A global famine that would have threatened the
lives of more than one billion people was prevented in large part by the
work of one man who never intended to take up that work in the first
place. In spite of his monumental impact on the lives of billions of
people, few enough know his name even today. That man was
Norman Borlaug.

Norm, as Borlaug was known to all who worked with him, came from humble
beginnings. He was born in a small town in the northeastern corner of
Iowa, where he grew up on a farm and attended classes in a one-room
schoolhouse. As he came of age in the midst of the Great Depression,
Norm experienced firsthand the effects of the existing agricultural
practices and how the resulting Dust Bowl devastated crop yields, soil
quality, and the lives of farmers. These experiences impressed upon him
that there had to be better ways to farm while preserving the land.

Norm went on to become the first in his family to attend college. He
initially intended to train to become a high school science teacher but
ended up studying forestry so he could enter the US Forestry Service as
a Forest Ranger. The year of Norm's graduation, however, budget cuts
terminated the position for which he would have been hired. He was told
that a spot may be available in six months. In the interim, Norm took a
few extra credits in college and attended a lecture that would shape the
rest of his life. Dr. Elvin Stakman, the head of the plant pathology
department, gave the lecture on the topic of rust, a fungal disease that
significantly reduces yields of wheat and a number of other cereal
crops. At the end of that lecture, Dr. Stakman made a statement that
would have strained credulity at the time, but which Borlaug's work
proved to be true. The science of rust resistance, Dr. Stakman said,
would "go further than has ever been possible to eradicate the miseries
of hunger and starvation from this earth."

After that lecture, Borlaug's life took a different path. He decided to
pursue a doctorate in plant pathology at the University of Minnesota,
and graduated in 1942 just after the United States had officially
entered World War II. Norm went on to work for DuPont Corporation for
two years as part of his wartime service. While at DuPont, Norm was
approached by the Rockefeller Foundation to join a new project they were
funding in rural Mexico. That project appointment, which Borlaug
accepted, was to develop a rust-resistant wheat that would alleviate the
food insecurity that plagued many Mexican communities.

"In 1944, when Borlaug arrived in Mexico, its farmers raised less than
half of the wheat necessary to meet the demands of the population. Rust
perennially ruined or diminished the harvest," Professor R. Douglas
Hurt, of the Department of History at Purdue University, observed. In
Mexico, Norm worked with the local organization Centro Internacional de
Majoramiento de Maize y Trigo (CIMMYT). Initially, it was tough for
Borlaug. The local farmers had little reason to trust a young American
who did not speak their language and were hesitant to adopt new farming
techniques that they thought may leave them in an even more
precarious situation.

But Norm, famous now for his work ethic, persevered, learning the local
Spanish dialect and working long days in the fields breeding new strains
wheat. "Borlaug labored for 13 years before he and his team of
agricultural scientists developed a disease resistant wheat," Professor
Hurt states, "\[But\] still problems remained." The primary problem was
that the new rust-resistant wheat did not have stems strong enough to
hold the now heavy heads of grain. As a result, the plants would blow
over under heavy wind and rain, a process known as "lodging."

To solve this new problem that stood between Borlaug and his goal of a
self-sufficient Mexico, he looked to a dwarf strain of wheat from Japan.
He sought to breed this dwarf strain with his rust-resistant strain,
producing a wheat that could tolerate the hot, dry climate of northern
Mexico without lodging during storms. But time was short. Without this
new semi-dwarf wheat strain, Borlaug's rust-resistant wheat was of
limited use due to its vulnerability to storms.

To accelerate his breeding efforts, Borlaug developed a new method known
as "shuttle breeding." He grew two separate crops of wheat, one in the
semi-arid, irrigated plains of Ciudad Obregón in Sonora and the other in
the region of Toluca at an altitude or 2600m and under 1000mm of
rainfall during the growing season. To take advantage of the two
different growing seasons, he would harvest the crop from one region and
shuttle the seeds to the other for planting. It also doubled Borlaug's
output per year compared to his peers.

This method effectively bred for a rust-resistant strain of wheat that
could grow in most warm climates, since the same wheat was bred in two
different climates. The result, a rust-resistant, semi-dwarf wheat, was
broadly considered an agricultural miracle. Further, Norm's
unconventional shuttle breeding also led his wheat to be photoperiod
insensitive, meaning that two crops per year could be cultivated,
massively increasing the calories that could be produced per acre. Aided
by irrigation and fertilizers, Borlaug's wheat enabled Mexico to achieve
grain self-sufficiency in 1956, something many others thought would be
impossible for many more years.

But Norm did not consider this a victory. Rather, he considered it "a
temporary success in man's war against hunger and deprivation." He
recognized that the "Population Bomb" was still looming large in Asia,
Africa, and the Middle East, and that further work was needed to ensure
food security and stability in those regions. Norm was known to say that
"world peace will not be built on empty stomachs." Indeed, that
statement would describe his life's work.

Norman Borlaug remains the only agricultural scientist to have ever been
honored with the Nobel Peace Prize. He is also one of its least known
recipients. His work is perhaps the single most important reason that
food production expanded faster than human population everywhere in the
world outside sub-Saharan Africa. His miracle wheat and rice ended
cycles of famine in many countries and prevented mass starvations that
would have numbered in the hundreds of millions in the following years.
It is ironic that his name is largely unrecognized compared to his peer
Nobel Peace Prize Laureates, given that he has "probably saved more
lives than all of them put together." Indeed, Borlaug is today
frequently dubbed "the man who saved a billion lives."
