---
title: "APAC Agri-Food Innovation Summit Announces TWO Start-Up Innovation Challenges, with CPF and Cargill"
date: 2021-08-25 16:07:08
lastmod: 2021-08-25 16:07:08
slug: apac-agri-food-innovation-summit-announces-two-start-innovation-challenges-cpf-and-cargill
company_name: "Rethink Events"
company_link: "https://agrifoodinnovation.com/"
description: "​​​​​​​The Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit (November 16-18) has partnered with global food companies CPF and Cargill, creating a start-up Innovation Challenge with each partner to uncover fresh talent and technologies to benefit the APAC agri-food value chain."
excerpt: "​​​​​​​The Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit (November 16-18) has partnered with global food companies CPF and Cargill, creating a start-up Innovation Challenge with each partner to uncover fresh talent and technologies to benefit the APAC agri-food value chain."
proteins: [Plant-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Asia]
flags: [Press Release]
images: ["APAC21 Innovation Challenge Webinar.png"]
featured_image: "APAC21 Innovation Challenge Webinar.png"
draft: false
uuid: 9556
---
**ENTER NOW: Technologies to Improve Meatlike Taste, Texture or
Nutrition of Plant-Based Products; OR Digital Solutions to Connect and
Enhance Sustainability in APAC's Food Production Chain**

The Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit (November 16-18) has
partnered with global food companies CPF and Cargill, creating a
start-up Innovation Challenge with each partner to uncover fresh talent
and technologies to benefit the APAC agri-food value chain.

Start-ups are invited to apply until September 22:
[www.agrifoodinnovation.com/innovation-challenges-2021](http://www.agrifoodinnovation.com/innovation-challenges-2021)

**THE CPF INNOVATION CHALLENGE: Enhancing Texture, Juiciness and Aroma
to Create Healthy Plant-Based Meat Alternatives**

Consumer requirements today have become more complex. They don't just
want to consume "plant-based" foods, they require products that resemble
meat in all aspects such as texture, taste and nutritional value. CPF is
looking for companies with technologies to solve these pain-points, so
that consumers can say: "I can't believe this is not meat!"

Commenting on the challenge, Lalana Thiranusornkij, SVP - Head of
Innovation & NPD at CPF Thailand said:

*\"While CPF is a leading global company in animal proteins, we see the
consumer shift to Flexitarian. With CPF's vision to be the \"Kitchen of
the World\", we want to keep up with changing consumer requirements, and
provide meat alternatives such as plant-based proteins and cell based
into their diets when they want it! We also look at other protein
sources with improved functionality and nutritional benefits in order to
match the experience of eating actual meat. We must use technology both
in-house and work with the open innovation ecosystem to recreate the
taste, texture and nutritional profile of meat.\"*

**THE CARGILL INNOVATION CHALLENGE: Digital Solutions to Connect and
Enhance the Sustainable Food Production Chain in APAC**

As part of its purpose to nourish the world in a safe, responsible and
sustainable way, Cargill invites start-ups to present digital solutions
that support sustainable food production and processing throughout the
value chain.

Solutions could range from on-farm digitalisation for farmers of all
sizes, to online marketplaces, supply-chain connectivity, innovative
by-products or manufacturing process that minimise wastage and support
processes to cut carbon and contribute to the circular economy. These
innovative digital technologies should support environmental, social and
economic sustainability in food production and/or processing.

Colin D'Silva, Vice President Government Relations at Cargill said:

*\"This is an exciting opportunity for us to bring together people,
ideas and technologies for a more sustainable agri-food value chain. The
APAC region presents a rich and diverse supply chain, including
smallholder farmers, agri retail and marketplaces, industrial
processing, and logistics. Digital solutions offer vital tools to
support sustainable practices, efficiencies and transparency throughout
the value chain, supporting the producers, reducing food waste,
achieving cost benefits and creating USPs for the conscious consumer.\"*

The final pitches will take place during the 4th Asia-Pacific Agri-Food
Innovation Summit on November 16-18, as three innovators for each
Challenge pitch on screen to judges from CPF and Cargill, livestreamed
to a global audience of agri-food corporates, growers and food brands,
investors, retailers and technology providers.

The winners, to be revealed live by CPF and Cargill at the summit, will
enjoy tailored mentoring and access to senior innovation teams with
their respective Challenge Partner, with scope to develop, pilot and
trial their technologies together. It's a significant opportunity to
accelerate their technology development and go-to-market activities.

**WEBINAR INSIGHTS:**

An interactive webinar on September 1 will dive deeper into each
Challenge, as business innovation leaders from both Cargill and CPF
discuss the reasons for their challenge focus, what they are looking for
(and can offer) in a start-up partnership, and what's happening in the
exciting agri-food innovation ecosystem across Asia-Pacific. The webinar
is open to all, sign up to watch at
[www.agrifoodinnovation.com/innovation-challenges-2021](http://www.agrifoodinnovation.com/innovation-challenges-2021).

Theresa Flach, Conference Producer at Rethink Events, organiser of the
Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit said: *"Asia-Pacific is
renowned for its focus on agri-food innovation and appetite to scale new
technologies. We're excited to see what breakthroughs will be
spotlighted on our global summit stage! The value to a start-up of this
opportunity to work directly with globally influential brands like
Cargill and CPF can't be overstated -- it's a powerful opportunity to
raise their profile and connect with the corporate and investment
partners they need to scale their solutions and start achieving their
full potential in the supply chain."*

The three day APAC Agri-Food Innovation Summit programme and speaker
faculty are available now, with delegate registration at
[www.agrifoodinnovation.com](http://www.agrifoodinnovation.com)

**About APAC Agri-Food Innovation Summit:
[www.agrifoodinnovation.com](http://www.agrifoodinnovation.com)**

Scaling Sustainable Food Production in Asia

Now in its fourth year, the Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit on
November 16-18, 2021 will bring together the world's leading
agribusinesses, growers, CPG and ingredient brands, entrepreneurs,
investors, retailers and policymakers to share ideas and collaborate
towards greater security and sustainability in Asia's agri-food system.

From empowering smallholder farmers and building more connected,
resilient supply chains to indoor farming models, holistic nutrition and
health strategies, the summit will identify the most important
opportunities and challenges as the region recovers from the COVID-19
pandemic.

A hybrid event combining both in-person elements in Singapore and a full
virtual experience tailored to an international audience, the summit
will facilitate high-value connections and foster long-lasting business
relationships.

**About Rethink Events:
[www.rethinkevents.com](http://www.rethinkevents.com)**

UK-based Rethink Events organises international, world-renowned business
technology summits, bringing together the brightest and best minds among
entrepreneurs, businesses and global investors in sustainable food,
agriculture, materials and water.
