---
title: "The Shojinmeat Project Inside Story"
date: 2021-09-07 09:55:11
lastmod: 2021-09-07 09:55:11
slug: shojinmeat-project-inside-story
description: "Japan is forging a unique development path for cellular agriculture — one in which no one is left behind and anyone interested can get involved in helping create an open, inclusive future for the technology. This is the story of the Shojinmeat Project and how a citizen science experiment came to have big impact on national policy."
excerpt: "Japan is forging a unique development path for cellular agriculture — one in which no one is left behind and anyone interested can get involved in helping create an open, inclusive future for the technology. This is the story of the Shojinmeat Project and how a citizen science experiment came to have big impact on national policy."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Business, Culture, Policy]
regions: [Asia]
flags: [Featured]
directory: [697, 698, 5816, 5818, 5820, 5829, 7111, 7112]
contributors: [9605]
images: ["SP.jpg","OasisProtein_1.jpg", "CellAgBarn.jpg", "CellExYoFa.jpg", "AlgavitaComplex.jpg", "cutA2017022500.jpg", "HiracaanasiVerticalCellAg.jpg", "VitaLittora.jpg", "Morphogenesis_0.jpg", "Myoreplicators_0.jpg", "0003_0.jpg", "Oceanodrome2.jpg", "SuspensionCulture_1.jpg", "Nix=Sujianis2.jpg", "Shojinmeat(1).jpg", "ギャルゲ画面1.jpg", "961bfbaf829efe4905e3ee485bcd4ef7_1.jpg", "DUCo_30UQAADOL4,jpg", "rulemaking.jpg"]
featured_image: "SP.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "Shojinmeat Project artist rendition of a high-rise farm in the year 2203: Algae feeds meat growing in the central tower. Copyright Shojinmeat Project."
additional_images:
  - src: "OasisProtein_1.jpg"
    caption: "&quot;Oasis Protein&quot; desert food depot. Mid-scale closed-loop cellular agriculture facility that uses closed-tube algae photobioreactor - green algae for basal medium, red algae for media recycle."
    alt: "&quot;Oasis Protein&quot; desert food depot. Mid-scale closed-loop cellular agriculture facility that uses closed-tube algae photobioreactor - green algae for basal medium, red algae for media recycle."
    title: "&quot;Oasis Protein&quot; desert food depot. Mid-scale closed-loop cellular agriculture facility that uses closed-tube algae photobioreactor - green algae for basal medium, red algae for media recycle."
  - src: "CellAgBarn.jpg"
    caption:  "Cellular agriculture farmscape - there would be fewer cows while bioreactors are installed in the backyard."
    alt:  "Cellular agriculture farmscape - there would be fewer cows while bioreactors are installed in the backyard."
    title:  "Cellular agriculture farmscape - there would be fewer cows while bioreactors are installed in the backyard."
  - src: "CellExYoFa.jpg"
    caption:  "“CellEx YoFa” urban microfarm. A cell extraction facility housing only one cow operating as a farm at an urban center."
    alt:  "“CellEx YoFa” urban microfarm. A cell extraction facility housing only one cow operating as a farm at an urban center."
    title:  "“CellEx YoFa” urban microfarm. A cell extraction facility housing only one cow operating as a farm at an urban center."
  - src: "AlgavitaComplex.jpg"
    caption:  "Ocean protein farming. Ocean floating biomass facility to produce basal medium."
    alt:  "Ocean protein farming. Ocean floating biomass facility to produce basal medium."
    title:  "Ocean protein farming. Ocean floating biomass facility to produce basal medium."
  - src: "cutA2017022500.jpg"
    caption:  "Shojinmeat Mars “Nirvana-Alpha.” Watch Miyo-san and Aco-chan tour a Martian cell-ag facility at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-CK2V6jrfY&amp;t=56s (VR headset recommended)."
    alt:  "Shojinmeat Mars “Nirvana-Alpha.” Watch Miyo-san and Aco-chan tour a Martian cell-ag facility at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-CK2V6jrfY&amp;t=56s (VR headset recommended)."
    title:  "Shojinmeat Mars “Nirvana-Alpha.” Watch Miyo-san and Aco-chan tour a Martian cell-ag facility at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-CK2V6jrfY&amp;t=56s (VR headset recommended)."
  - src: "HiracaanasiVerticalCellAg.jpg"
    caption:  "Vertical farm superskyscraper. Superskyscrapers with integrated cellular agriculture facilities may be a futuristic version of buildings with vines."
    alt:  "Vertical farm superskyscraper. Superskyscrapers with integrated cellular agriculture facilities may be a futuristic version of buildings with vines."
    title:  "Vertical farm superskyscraper. Superskyscrapers with integrated cellular agriculture facilities may be a futuristic version of buildings with vines."
  - src: "VitaLittora.jpg"
    caption:  "“Vita Littora Cultures” seafood factory. A small-scale seafood cellular agriculture facility with aquaculture ponds and proliferation tanks are operating at room temperature."
    alt:  "“Vita Littora Cultures” seafood factory. A small-scale seafood cellular agriculture facility with aquaculture ponds and proliferation tanks are operating at room temperature."
    title:  "“Vita Littora Cultures” seafood factory. A small-scale seafood cellular agriculture facility with aquaculture ponds and proliferation tanks are operating at room temperature."
  - src: "Morphogenesis_0.jpg"
    caption:  "“Shojinmeat Nirvana-Alpha” 3D/tissue morphogenesis regulator unit facility that produces structured meat at a Martian cell-cultured meat factory - regulation of morphogenesis becomes key for whole tissue culture."
    alt:  "“Shojinmeat Nirvana-Alpha” 3D/tissue morphogenesis regulator unit facility that produces structured meat at a Martian cell-cultured meat factory - regulation of morphogenesis becomes key for whole tissue culture."
    title:  "“Shojinmeat Nirvana-Alpha” 3D/tissue morphogenesis regulator unit facility that produces structured meat at a Martian cell-cultured meat factory - regulation of morphogenesis becomes key for whole tissue culture."
  - src: "Myoreplicators_0.jpg"
    caption:  "Large-scale meat brewery. Large-scale proliferation tanks may look like a beer brewery."
    alt:  "Large-scale meat brewery. Large-scale proliferation tanks may look like a beer brewery."
    title:  "Large-scale meat brewery. Large-scale proliferation tanks may look like a beer brewery."
  - src: "0003_0.jpg"
    caption:  "Solarpunk meets cellular agriculture. A Solarpunk scenery of distributed community-scale bio-manufacturing and cellular agriculture facilities on a tropical drone-oriented city."
    alt:  "Solarpunk meets cellular agriculture. A Solarpunk scenery of distributed community-scale bio-manufacturing and cellular agriculture facilities on a tropical drone-oriented city."
    title:  "Solarpunk meets cellular agriculture. A Solarpunk scenery of distributed community-scale bio-manufacturing and cellular agriculture facilities on a tropical drone-oriented city."
  - src: "Oceanodrome2.jpg"
    caption:  "“Beef under sea” - An undersea room equipped with a whole tissue culture apparatus."
    alt:  "“Beef under sea” - An undersea room equipped with a whole tissue culture apparatus."
    title:  "“Beef under sea” - An undersea room equipped with a whole tissue culture apparatus."
  - src: "SuspensionCulture_1.jpg"
    caption:  "“Shojinmeat Nirvana-Alpha” suspension culture unit. Suspension culture units that produce unstructured meat."
    alt:  "“Shojinmeat Nirvana-Alpha” suspension culture unit. Suspension culture units that produce unstructured meat."
    title:  "“Shojinmeat Nirvana-Alpha” suspension culture unit. Suspension culture units that produce unstructured meat."
  - src: "Nix=Sujianis2.jpg"
    caption:  "“Vital Vector” comet mining &amp; mass driver station. While asteroid mining does metals, comet mining does volatiles. Food, plastics and biomass can be shot to other parts of the solar system by a mass driver at the center."
    alt:  "“Vital Vector” comet mining &amp; mass driver station. While asteroid mining does metals, comet mining does volatiles. Food, plastics and biomass can be shot to other parts of the solar system by a mass driver at the center."
    title:  "“Vital Vector” comet mining &amp; mass driver station. While asteroid mining does metals, comet mining does volatiles. Food, plastics and biomass can be shot to other parts of the solar system by a mass driver at the center."
  - src: "Shojinmeat(1).jpg"
    caption:  "“Shojinmeat Mars” reception room. Reception room of a Martian cell-cultured meat factory."
    alt:  "“Shojinmeat Mars” reception room. Reception room of a Martian cell-cultured meat factory."
    title:  "“Shojinmeat Mars” reception room. Reception room of a Martian cell-cultured meat factory."
  - src: "ギャルゲ画面1.jpg"
    caption:  "“Aco-chan’s school trip souvenir” - A visual novel game snapshot with a cell-ag reference."
    alt:  "“Aco-chan’s school trip souvenir” - A visual novel game snapshot with a cell-ag reference."
    title:  "“Aco-chan’s school trip souvenir” - A visual novel game snapshot with a cell-ag reference."
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 9606
---
**Editor's note:** *Most English-language news and reporting about
cellular agriculture relays a common narrative of the industry's
development, from Mark Post's pioneering the first cell-based burger in
2013 to the first regulatory approval and cell-based meat product launch
in Singapore at the end of 2020. But this is just part of the
technology's history. There's a largely unheard story unfolding in Japan
that shows a whole other realm of possibility for how an industry can be
born --- one in which citizen scientists grow meat at home, come
together as a community, and ultimately play a key role in policy-making
processes that unlock public funding, generate consumer awareness, and
open the door for product launches. This movement is called the
Shojinmeat Project and its founder is Yuki Hanyu.*

*This article is the story of some of the Shojinmeat Project's key
milestones and achievements told in Hanyu's own words. Much of its
content was originally authored in Japanese but has been synthesized
into English in a collaborative process with Protein Report editors.*

*Disclosure: Yuki Hanyu is Founder and CEO of IntegriCulture Inc., one
of Protein Report's sponsors, but this is not sponsored content ---
Protein Report has retained full editorial control and the decision to
publish it was in no way influenced by IntergriCulture's sponsorship. We
believe this is a story that needs to be made accessible to
global audiences.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the past, there have been cases of scientists and entrepreneurs
inspired by popular works of science fiction starting a venture to bring
those futuristic visions into reality. In retrospect, I was one of them,
with my sources of inspiration being anime, manga, and video games. The
futures portrayed in these works, though --- with things grown in
fluorescent-green culture vats --- ranged from dystopian to utopian.
Obviously, I wanted the utopian version, so I began the [Shojinmeat
Project](https://shojinmeat.com/wordpress/en/) in February 2014 as an
optimistic experiment.

Because of its promise as a technology that may eventually touch the
life of every person on the planet, I knew there was a different way to
generate public interest and further research in cellular agriculture.
Rather than follow the standard path for tech innovation, I wanted to
see what would happen if we started with affordable, accessible
resources and an open-source approach to the technology's development.
How far could our collective creativity take us?

The Shojinmeat Project is a Japanese nonprofit serving a global
community of citizen scientists interested in cellular agriculture.
There is no formal definition of membership and the group is open to
anyone wanting to get into this field, whether through DIY cell culture,
artistic activities, hosting academic conferences, or simply sharing
information and enthusiasm.

Since its founding, we have involved countless young citizen scientists
and served as a pipeline for those talents to move into policy and
advisory roles within the Japanese government and private sector. Our
meetings have also been a starting point for a number of public- and
private-sector spin offs to form and come together, making significant
contributions toward a uniquely open and inclusive cellular agriculture
industry in Japan.

But while I have previously been interviewed about some specific
developments, only those who were there from the beginning saw the whole
journey --- and so I'd like to share here the story of some of the
Shojinmeat Project's key milestones and how our little experiment came
to have a big impact on national policy.

**Beginnings**

The Shojinmeat Project was born from a casual gathering of students and
graduates at an informal coworking space in Tokyo. When I pitched the
idea of cell-cultured meat, Dr. Ikko, a life-science post-doc who would
later become the CTO of IntegriCulture, responded with the idea of
large-scale cell-culture based on commodity food materials and
conditioned medium. Since the concept was testable through DIY bio
outside traditional laboratory environments, we set out to explore
its feasibility.

Growing the nascent Shojinmeat Project community was another matter. We
needed a hook that represented our geocultural context and unique
vision, while appealing to young people who tend to be more open to new
ideas. Avoiding elitism, hubris, and ensuring transparency were key
priorities to prevent distrust (like we had seen around GMOs) of this
new food technology.

With these goals in mind, we knew environmental sustainability would not
be sufficiently compelling as it lacked entertainment value. Similarly,
an animal-welfare focus was too foreign and polarizing. In contrast,
however, sci-fi anime, manga, and literature had already made references
to cell-cultured meat in their visions of the future. And admittedly, I
was (and still am) heavily immersed in "otaku" fandom --- the Japanese
term often used to describe young people with an obsessive interest in
subjects such as computers, video games, anime, and manga.

We started by posting our DIY cell-culture procedure on Niconico, the
most popular video-sharing platform among otaku in Japan, including an
actual tasting of DIY homegrown meat. What was shown in the video was
also converted into a fanzine to be sold at Comiket, an event similar to
ComicCon in the US. These approaches were both entertaining and
effective at showcasing our radically transparent approach to the
cell-culturing process, while eliminating any elements of elitism from
the subject.

There was definitely a young, playful counterculture spirit, among the
members we attracted through these activities and a lot of our
motivation was driven by a sort of rebellious, ironic humor: A
high-school student growing meat at home ahead of universities or
corporations? We actually did that, and it was televised nationwide in
2017. Shortly after the televised event, IntegriCulture --- which was
registered in 2015 as a vehicle to gain access to lab equipment for the
Shojinmeat Project --- spun off to go on its own startup journey.

While forging this unique path, we were also monitoring developments
overseas. As early as 2015, Shojinmeat Project members were in contact
with both New Harvest and the newly created Good Food Institute, sharing
our approach and incorporating their work into ours. It was around this
time that much of the sector's terminology was beginning to develop ---
the term "cellular agriculture" was [coined in New Harvest's Facebook
group](https://new-harvest.org/lost-history-naming-cellular-agriculture/),
and having seen this development, a Shojinmeat Project member coined the
Japanese term and created its Japanese-language [Wikipedia
page](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E7%B4%B0%E8%83%9E%E8%BE%B2%E6%A5%AD).

At a 2016 conference organized by Dr. Mark Post, the Maastricht
University scientist who created the first cell-cultured hamburger in
2013, I made a presentation on DIY cultured meat, introducing attendees
to the Shojinmeat Project, our citizen-science mission, and our unique
positioning, backed neither by a corporation nor a university. Our goal
was two-fold: we wanted to raise awareness about cellular agriculture as
well as to nurture a working model in which anyone was empowered to
contribute to the technology's development.

Later, aided by an offer of help from a South African supporter, we
launched an open-access [English-language Slack
channel](https://shojinmeatenglish.slack.com/join/shared_invite/enQtMzExMTIzMjM5MjUyLWZhYmM2OGNkYzdmMmFhMWJkY2NlZTlkNDU1ZTAyZDFiY2Q2ODM1ZTllMjI1MzBlYjJiYjdmMjEwNDdkYjA1NDg#/shared-invite/email)
to connect people from around the world who were interested in cellular
agriculture. The connection with New Harvest also [led to
funding](https://thespoon.tech/shojinmeat-scores-grant-for-open-source-clean-meat-initiative/)
from the Shuttleworth Foundation, a philanthropic organization that
supports those working on innovative solutions to social problems.

After starting small and developing our hobbyist community over several
years, our work finally began to attract greater attention.

**JST-Mirai Program**

In the fall of 2017, a number of officials from the Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST) came to one of the Shojinmeat Project's weekly
meetings held at the [FabCafe](https://fabcafe.com/jp/tokyo/) in Tokyo.
One of those representatives was considering cultured meat as the
subject of their next open call for "future society creation projects"
(JST-Mirai), a class of JST-supported projects aimed at encouraging
Japanese innovation and environmental sustainability. Buoyed by the
initiative on display and the ideas being presented --- including chats
about DIY home kitchen experimentation and live seed cell sharing ---
JST officials saw promise in our work, and in cellular agriculture as a
whole. At that time, Shojinmeat Project was the only source of
information on cellular agriculture from perspectives specifically
relevant to Japan.

{{< figure src="DUCo_30UQAADOL4.jpg" alt="January 2018, Shojinmeat Project members at FabCafe in Tokyo making a DIY centrifuge that can be attached to a fan using FabCafe's 3D printer" caption="January 2018, Shojinmeat Project members at FabCafe in Tokyo making a DIY centrifuge that can be attached to a fan using FabCafe's 3D printer. Source: Shojinmeat Project." >}}

It was also during this period --- as our first cohort of high school
students had become energized by their DIY meat-growing experiments ---
that the Shojinmeat Project began reaching new audiences. We had created
an anime-inspired [video of a DIY cultured-meat
bun](https://www.nicovideo.jp/watch/sm31104033) for a presentation at
the Niconico Chokaigi Convention (similar to Los Angeles' Anime Expo),
challenging anyone interested to make the same thing, and we were
overwhelmed by the enthusiastic response.

A few months later, in May of 2018 and after several rounds of further
meetings and email exchanges between JST officials and Shojinmeat
Project members, the [JST-Mirai
Program](https://www.jst.go.jp/mirai/en/program/sustainable/JPMJMI20C1.html)
was launched. This was an ambitious program that allocated \$20 million
over five years to a team of academic labs and industry players, with
the goal of developing a one-centimeter-thick steak using a culture
medium made from microalgae. The scale and scope were years ahead of
other countries' projects. It was the first time so much public funding
had been earmarked for cultured meat research and the intention behind
this generous funding was for both companies and universities to put it
to practical and innovative use. In early project milestones, [Nissin
Foods](https://www.nissin.com/en_jp/sustainability/feature/cultured-meat/)
revealed a [cube of cultured
meat](https://soranews24.com/2019/03/24/cup-noodle-makers-successfully-create-lab-grown-diced-steak-with-authentic-texture/)
in 2019, while Tokyo Women's Medical University published [exciting
research](https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/btpr.2941)
into microalgae hydrolysate basal medium.

Although we can't claim responsibility for the launch of the JST-Mirai
Program, there were clear synchronicities between its timing, focus, and
our meetings and exchanges with those JST officials. This was hugely
encouraging and a sign of even greater things to come.

**MAFF Food Tech Study Group**

Around the same time as the launch of the JST-Mirai program, some
significant developments were also brewing inside Japan's Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF).

In 2018, a group of energetic young MAFF officials formed around a
mutual frustration with the ministry's largely "reactive" approach to
policy making. This group --- called Team 414 --- instead wanted to see
MAFF leading innovation on farming, food, and sustainability issues
rather than merely responding to challenges as they emerge --- and the
Shojinmeat Project caught their attention.

Team 414 began by [publishing
documents](https://business.nikkei.com/atcl/report/15/252376/050900143/)
[urging the
government](https://www.facebook.com/OpenLabwithMAFF/posts/1633554220076283/)
to leverage emerging food technologies and take a more forward-looking
approach. Throughout that year, they also organized several meetings
that brought together key stakeholders to explore possible strategies.
Shojinmeat Project members enthusiastically participated in those
meetings, and, looking back at [photos from that
time](https://agri.mynavi.jp/2018_10_26_45353/), I can see one of our
members with a copy of the Pure Meat Book --- the self-published zine
containing a DIY cell-culture manual made for the Comiket convention.

{{< figure src="961bfbaf829efe4905e3ee485bcd4ef7_1.jpg" alt="Meeting with Team 414 showing a Shojinmeat Project member holding the Pure Meat Book" caption="Meeting with Team 414 showing a Shojinmeat Project member holding the Pure Meat Book. Source: [agri.mynavi.jp](https://agri.mynavi.jp/2018_10_26_45353/)" >}}

At these forums, speakers from Team 414 discussed emerging food
technologies, alternative protein, and the burgeoning culture and global
interest that was developing around cellular agriculture. Based on these
exchanges, they submitted an internal policy advisory in April 2019
aimed at promoting cell-cultured meat and cellular agriculture
innovation within MAFF.

The advisory's goal was to create a better Japanese model for the
development of cell-cultured meat, one in which the industry's potential
and opportunities would not be concentrated among a few, but instead
openly shared with livestock farmers and other traditional agricultural
interests. In order to ensure a sustainable future for cellular
agriculture in Japan, they reasoned, the industry would need to take a
less confrontational and more inclusive approach from the beginning,
thus avoiding the tensions between its proponents and the traditional
livestock industry advocates, as has been seen in the US and other
countries. According to the officials from Team 414, much of the
material on cellular agriculture in their policy advisory, including a
potential model for integrating traditional farmers, was borrowed from
the Shojinmeat Project's [open-access
slides](https://www.slideshare.net/2co/2019-127817694).

Though some members of Team 414 were concerned that older MAFF officials
might not grasp the importance of the proposal, the fact it was
submitted was nevertheless an important milestone --- and it didn't go
unnoticed within MAFF.

In April 2020, MAFF established the "Food Tech Study Group" with members
of Team 414 at its core. This was a collaborative, multidisciplinary,
open forum intended to gather perspectives from food companies, research
institutes, government agencies, and venture capital firms. There were
no restrictions on who could participate and this was important to us
because the key value of this study group was in getting everyone ---
including stakeholders from the world of conventional agriculture --- on
board, so that we could establish inclusive policies that respected all
participants of all sectors.

Many members of the Shojinmeat Project joined this forum, and several
were instrumental in leading its cell-ag discussions --- one (who later
became the GFI-APAC Japan delegate) introduced overseas regulatory
systems, another posited how Muslims may view cell-cultured meat, while
others led discussions on public communications and key technical
hurdles. Additionally, many of the questions and topics that arose at
these meetings were based on information from the Shojinmeat Project's
[slideshow](https://www.slideshare.net/2co/shojinmeat-project-open-source-cellular-agriculture-initiative-2021)
which had previously been shared with the group's participants.

One of the study group's key outputs was a Japanese-language [interim
report](https://www.maff.go.jp/j/kanbo/foodtech/foodtech_kenkyukai_torimatome.pdf)
on strategies to leverage emerging food technologies that would
contribute toward a more sustainable food economy and better Japanese
food security. The study group was later reorganized into the "Food Tech
Government Council" --- exclusively for exploring and coordinating
public sector collaboration --- and the "[Food Tech Public-Private
Council](https://www.gov-base.info/en/2020/09/25/127328)" which is held
privately in order to allow for the sharing of trade secrets and other
sensitive information among its participants. As part of its regular
monitoring of government and industry activity, the USDA's Foreign
Agricultural Service also
[reported](https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=Japan%20Begins%20to%20Explore%20Regulations%20for%20Alternative%20Meat%20Products_Tokyo_Japan_08-12-2020)
on these developments.

In this way, our vision of a cell-ag revolution with no one left behind
had begun to take shape within the government.

**Establishment of JACA --- the Japan Association for
Cellular Agriculture**

Technology is a double-edged sword and promoting innovation alone isn't
enough to ensure we actually reap its benefits. Instead, nonprofits like
New Harvest and Shojinmeat Project advocate for how a cell-ag future
*should* look by thinking several steps beyond simple feasibility.

This approach is also closely related to the concept of
[rulemaking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rulemaking). Rulemaking
differs significantly from lobbying: While lobbyists may work on behalf
of special interests or specific industries to achieve policy or
regulatory goals, rulemaking takes a broader, more inclusive approach
--- one that concerns how things should be from a multi-stakeholder
perspective, balancing interests from government, industry, academia,
and nonprofits, to stage a society-wide harmonization process.

Perhaps the most noteworthy but underreported aspect of the Shojinmeat
Project's work has been its impact on rulemaking for cellular
agriculture in Japan.

Shojinmeat Project slide on inclusive rulemaking for cellular
agriculture. Source: Shojinmeat Project.

Thanks to Team 414 and the JST-Mirai Program, the momentum surrounding
rulemaking for cellular agriculture was beginning to form inside the
government, but we were still missing a nonprofit thinktank dedicated to
cellular agriculture. Cellular Agriculture Institute of the Commons
(CAIC) spun out from the Shojinmeat Project to fill this role. With this
new entity, we now had sufficient private-sector, nonprofit, and
government involvement to launch a formal rulemaking process aimed at
creating and implementing cellular agriculture policies.

The Tama University Center for Rulemaking Strategies (CRS) is a think
tank that brings together public, private, academic, and
nonprofit-sector stakeholders to both formulate and implement new
policies. After being contacted by a Shojinmeat Project member, CRS
began organizing roundtable discussions on cellular agriculture. This
[multi-stakeholder
roundtable](https://crs-japan.org/en/programs/cellular-agriculture/)
became the Japan Association for Cellular Agriculture (JACA), and the
Shojinmeat Project think-tank spinout --- CAIC --- was appointed to lead
those discussions as its secretariat.

This formalization of the rulemaking process connects back to the Food
Tech Study Group in which MAFF's Team 414 was so instrumental. That
group had since split into several subgroups to focus on specific topics
such as plant-based proteins, insect-based proteins, space food,
research funding, and cellular agriculture, among others. In September
of 2020, JACA formally inherited the cellular agriculture subgroup,
thereby becoming the official rulemaking body for cellular agriculture
in Japan.

The upcoming agenda for JACA includes the assembly of a comprehensive
policy recommendation, formation of a [parliamentary
alliance](http://www.fao.org/policy-support/policy-themes/parliamentary-alliances/en/)
for cellular agriculture, and submission of the policy recommendation to
government agencies and other policy makers under the auspices of the
parliamentary alliance. These recommendations will cover broad topics to
synchronize developments across a range of sectors, including food
safety regulations, IP handling of starter cells, allocating of power
and responsibility among agencies, recommendations on trade union scopes
and policies, focus areas for academic studies, and recommended schemes
for grants and subsidies.

So far, these developments have not attracted much media attention. But
JACA has been steadily growing and attracting key international players
such as GFI-APAC, BlueNalu, MosaMeat, Aleph Farms, and other global
stakeholders, all of whom have taken part in its discussions. In this
way, our citizen-science experiment has already borne more fruit than I
ever could have expected. Our inclusive, no-one-left-behind vision for
cellular agriculture can now be seen in Japan's national policy, with a
public-inclusive approach having become the default working model. We
hope this will serve as inspiration for others aiming to achieve
similar objectives.

Looking ahead, the Shojinmeat Project's goal is to continue working to
ensure cellular agriculture develops as a technology with accessible
entry points for ordinary citizens and anyone else wanting to get
involved --- not just for corporations, elite investors, or other
profit-seeking interests. How things should be is achievable, but only
if we embrace and continuously work toward a truly open and inclusive
development path for this new industry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Additional notes and links:**

DIY cell culture manuals (March 2020 versions):

[DIY culture medium manual for DMEM and
L15](https://www.slideshare.net/2co/diy-culture-medium-manual-for-dmem-and-l15)
[DIY cell culture manual (& the roadmap to DIY
cell-based meat)](https://www.slideshare.net/2co/diy-cell-culture-manual-the-roadmap-to-diy-cellbased-meat)

In November 2019, Dr. Mark Post visited Japan to speak at a public
science event organized by JST as a part of the JST-Mirai Program. For
this event, high-school student members of the Shojinmeat Project
demonstrated a DIY culture medium made from amino acid supplements,
table salt, and other household materials. During Dr. Post's keynote
speech, he [drank the DIY medium on
stage](https://twitter.com/Rurumayu0915/status/1195945529366106122).

**Shojinmeat Project artwork gallery:** (All images copyright
Shojinmeat Project)

{{< gallery >}}