---
title: "Cellular Agriculture's Rising Star: A Conversation With Avery Parkinson"
date: 2021-09-21 09:29:21
lastmod: 2021-09-21 09:29:21
slug: cellular-agricultures-rising-star-conversation-avery-parkinson
description: "Every now and again a young person comes along whose intellect and wisdom seem to defy their age. Over the past year, we’ve had the privilege of working closely with one such individual. If you haven’t yet heard of her, you probably soon will. Meet cellular agriculture’s rising star, Avery Parkinson."
excerpt: "Every now and again a young person comes along whose intellect and wisdom seem to defy their age. Over the past year, we’ve had the privilege of working closely with one such individual. If you haven’t yet heard of her, you probably soon will. Meet cellular agriculture’s rising star, Avery Parkinson."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat, Dairy]
topics: [Business, Culture]
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: [Interview, Featured]
directory: [697, 698, 699, 6600, 7109, 7131]
contributors: [8106, 8107]
images: ["avery1.jpg"]
featured_image: "avery1.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 9687
---
Every now and again a young person comes along whose intellect and
wisdom seem to defy their age. Over the past year, we've had the
privilege of working closely with one such individual. If you haven't
yet heard of her, you probably soon will.

In July 2020, *Protein Report* received a message through its website
contact form:

*"Hi! My name is Avery Parkinson, and I'm a 15-year-old student from
Ottawa, Canada. Over the past nine months, I've been doing a lot of
research and writing into cellular agriculture as an alternative protein
source, and this summer, I am doing a research internship at Tufts
University and New Harvest on insect tissue engineering as a possibility
for cultured meat. ... As a frequent reader of your content, I was
wondering how I could get more involved in the amazing work you do!"*

A year later, Avery is now the 16-year-old executive director of
[Cellular Agriculture Canada](https://www.cellag.ca/). She's also the
recipient of a 2021 Diana Award, founder of [A Sandwich or
Two](https://asandwichortwo.com/), and co-founder of the [MapleWishes
Foundation](https://maplewishes.org/) --- not to mention one of *Protein
Report*'s leading contributors. The list of her accomplishments, awards,
and examples of selfless dedication to improving our food systems and
helping those in need is both humbling and inspiring.

But who is Avery Parkinson, and what goes on in the mind of such a young
leader? We decided to ask her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Give us a brief introduction. Where you're from, your main
professional, educational, and extracurricular activities --- basically
a summary of what someone would find on your resume.**

I'm from Ottawa, Canada, and in my last year of high school. I am very
passionate about food production, and so in addition to working with
*Protein Report*, I'm also the executive director of Cellular
Agriculture Canada and am collaborating with Just Vertical --- a
Canadian vertical gardening company --- to launch a podcast focusing on
the wide range of topics that fall under sustainable food systems. In
addition to these activities, I've started a project called the National
Sandwich Making Initiative, which aims to get schools and youth groups
across Canada organizing sessions where students come together to make
sandwiches in support of their local homeless populations. Because of
this, I've had the opportunity to be a part of programs such as the
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals Ambassadors and the
International Baccalaureate's Student Innovators. In school, I am this
year's community service prefect and so am involved with our
reconciliation coalition, sexuality and gender alliance, anti-racism and
allyship club, and I help manage initiatives that support nonprofit
organizations operating in our city.

**There are so many reasons to be excited about cellular agriculture.
Sustainability, animal welfare, more equitable food systems, new kinds
of foods and culinary possibilities, and more. How did you first learn
about cellular agriculture, and what initially captured your interest?**

When I was 13, I was enamored with the idea of vegetarianism, and after
a bit of contemplation, I decided to adopt the diet. Initially, I was
convinced that if everyone gave up meat in favor of plant-based foods,
many of the concerns surrounding modern livestock farming would be
rendered inconsequential. But after observing my mostly meat-eating
family, I realized that this approach was perhaps a little unreasonable
and would be unfair to ask of everyone. Two years later, a friend told
me about an article she read discussing Perfect Day's 1,000-order
limited launch of ice cream that incorporated non-animal whey protein.
After doing a little more research and realizing that this was an
application of cellular agriculture, I was struck by the technology's
potential to produce staples of our modern diet at scale and at reduced
expense to the environment, public health, and animal welfare ---
basically the three concerns I had with conventional meat production. It
may be able to ameliorate all of these challenges but still allow
consumers to enjoy the foods they've always been able to, and that's
what fascinated me.

**How has being immersed in the field changed your understanding of it
(if at all), and what excites you most about it now?**

Over the past couple of years, my understanding and feelings about
cellular agriculture have mainly been reaffirmed. Being involved with
organizations including New Harvest, the Good Food Institute, Big Idea
Ventures, and Cellular Agriculture Australia has exposed me to many
different angles from which people are working to advance the
technology. This has really highlighted for me how interdisciplinary the
subject is and how it not only benefits from but actually requires the
expertise of all different professions and skill sets in order to
realize its potential. We need the policymakers and regulators, the
investors and incubators, the entrepreneurs and researchers, and the
science communicators and reporters to make the field thrive. This is
what really excites me --- that there is no shortage of ways for people
to apply their diverse expertise and backgrounds, which only hints at
the creative things we might see come out of this field moving forward.

**You recently became executive director of Cellular Agriculture Canada.
Tell us about how that happened.**

Last December, our wonderful executive director, Yadira Tejeda-Saldana,
left us to work as research collaborations director at New Harvest. Up
until that point, I had been volunteering with Cellular Agriculture
Canada by doing communications for conferences and co-authoring a white
paper. So in the interim, I served as volunteer coordinator to help
manage some of the continuing projects. I really enjoyed taking on that
leadership role and thinking of my own ideas for how we might further
the field in Canada, and after a few months, it was suggested to me by a
couple of people that I apply to become the next executive director.

**As you explored in your article,** [**Cellular Agriculture Finds Its
True
North**](https://www.proteinreport.org/cellular-agriculture-finds-its-true-north)**,
Canada has a potentially significant role to play in the industry's
development. What do you see as the main challenges and opportunities
unique to Canada? And how do you plan to address them in your new role?
Any other exciting plans for the organization?**

To be honest, when it comes to cellular agriculture, I think that the
majority of the challenges Canada has are a combination of challenges we
are seeing in other countries. As the technical side of the field
becomes even more impressive --- the products becoming more accurate
analogs for conventional meat and their production more feasible --- the
importance of having a fair and appropriate regulatory framework for
commercial products is becoming more apparent. Additionally, because it
is not often clear whether cellular agriculture is considered to be
"agriculture" or a "bioscience," it is more difficult to apply for
sources of governmental funding. This is one of the main issues that CAC
is trying to tackle. Earlier this year, we convened the first-ever panel
of government regulators to discuss how the implementation of a
regulatory framework might look and we are in the process of publishing
a report summarizing the findings. We are also currently looking for a
policy coordinator to join our team and help us work with the regulators
to establish and pursue next steps.

Public acceptance of the technology has also been brought up as a
potential concern, and of course, I think that there are better ways of
going about introducing the technology to the general public. But I am
also of the opinion that if cell-based products can offer a similar or
better experience to consumers and achieve price parity with
conventional protein products, their adoption will follow. As with any
emerging technology, different segments of Canadian society will be able
to bring different perspectives and will raise different concerns. In
order to make sure that the implementation of this technology is as
beneficial for all Canadians as possible, CAC is trying to engage
different stakeholders in conversation so that we can proactively
address these concerns with informed solutions. In particular, our
country has a long history of colonization, the legacy of which is still
visible today in the way that food insecurity, the climate crisis, and
some chronic diseases are disproportionately affecting our multitude of
Indigenous communities. In the interest of contributing to the effort to
decolonize our food system, we are starting a project to listen to
Indigenous perspectives on the technology to discern how it can be
realized in such a way as to not intensify, and perhaps counteract, the
social issues highlighted by our current food system.

**Part of what makes you so remarkable is your age. How does it feel to
be such an influential young leader? What unique perspective do you
think that might bring to your work, the industry, public awareness, and
younger generations?**

I've never considered myself to be that influential of a leader, but I
do appreciate the sentiment! I think that everyone who works in cellular
agriculture --- and even the alternative protein industry --- is a
visionary, and I've been fortunate to have been able to learn from many
remarkable people from many different professional backgrounds who are
lending their expertise to the field. I think that as a youth, there is
a certain sense of urgency to act on the climate crisis, public health,
and other time-sensitive issues as this is the world we inherited and
will be passing on. As an individual, I also hope to inspire other young
people by example to continuously learn and do what they can to advance
their passion. From an outsider's perspective, cellular agriculture does
seem like a very niche field, but it is something I am happy to
contribute to every day.

**Should cellular agriculture be taking a more forward-looking approach
to marketing, like we've seen with the Shojinmeat Project in Japan? If
so, what might that look like in a Western cultural context?**

I am by no means an expert when it comes to marketing, but I do admire
the sense of futurism that the Shojinmeat Project is able to evoke
through its marketing and how it is able to align with styles of
graphics that are prevalent in Japanese pop culture (at least from my
understanding). I think because Canada has such a diverse range of
consumers, in particular a significant conservative demographic, we
would need to be a bit wary of making their initial brush with the
technology too futuristic in terms of the way it's presented. For other
consumers, this strategy may be incredibly effective --- it's about
finding that balance in order to provide a unified face for the
technology, especially at first. But in all honesty, this is a topic
about which I know very little, so I would be very interested to hear
other perspectives.

**You're running Cellular Agriculture Canada, managing your own charity
and nonprofit organization, working a summer job, and working with
*Protein Report* --- and you're still in high school. How do you manage
everything? Do you sleep?**

I think like most students, time management is always a work in
progress. That being said, when you enjoy the things you're working on,
it is that much more exciting to commit your time to them. One thing I
have learned over the past few years is to never be afraid to ask for
help. It's impossible to achieve all the things you want to complete by
yourself, and more often than not, collaborating with someone else with
complementary expertise will make you more successful. For this reason,
I am so grateful for our amazing team of volunteers and board members at
Cellular Agriculture Canada and the other organizations with which I
am affiliated.

**At 16 you've already launched an impressive career. Any ideas about
what directions you might go in the future, academically
or professionally?**

At the moment, it's a bit of a debate between bioengineering and
medicine. Regardless of what I end up doing, I would want it to have
implications for systems change beyond the actual tasks at hand. With
respect to bioengineering, I would hope to work in the cultivated meat
space, or at least the alternative protein industry in general. This
might end up looking like working at a startup or in research, but most
likely some combination of the two. Medicine was a relatively recent
consideration after I spent the summer working at a group home for
developmentally challenged adults. If I do pursue that route, I would
like to couple my practice with policymaking in order to ensure that
currently underserved segments of Canadian society are able to have
access to competent and equitable healthcare.

**Besides nerding out about food and cellular agriculture, what else do
you enjoy? Do any particular arts or other activities especially
inspire you?**

For sure! For about 10 years now I have been learning and performing a
style of classical Indian dance called Odissi. Since I was in elementary
school, I have also been writing competitive math contests. I'm also an
avid reader, and my favorite authors at the moment are Zadie Smith and
Viet Thanh Nguyen. Admittedly, my interest in food-related things does
carry over into my hobbies --- I also enjoy cooking and gardening with
my extended family.
