---
title: "Hoxton Farms Raises £2.7M Seed to Solve a Fat Problem for Meat Alternatives"
date: 2021-02-09 10:47:02
lastmod: 2021-02-09 10:47:02
slug: hoxton-farms-raises-ps27m-seed-solve-fat-problem-meat-alternatives
company: 8360
description: "UK-based Hoxton Farms has announced a £2.7 million seed round to cultivate animal fat and solve an urgent issue for the rapidly growing meat alternatives market."
excerpt: "UK-based Hoxton Farms has announced a £2.7 million seed round to cultivate animal fat and solve an urgent issue for the rapidly growing meat alternatives market."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Europe]
flags: [Press Release, Investments]
directory: [1294, 1303, 6280, 8229, 8360]
images: ["IMG_4682_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "IMG_4682_0.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "Hoxton Farms Co-Founders Ed Steele (R) and Dr Max Jamilly (L)"
draft: false
uuid: 8414
---
-   The startup grows real animal fat -- without the animals. Cultivated
    fat is a delicious, sustainable and versatile ingredient that has
    none of the drawbacks of plant oils currently used in meat
    alternatives
-   Hoxton Farms wants to 'bring back fat' and unlock a new kind of meat
    replacement that blends plant-based and cultivated ingredients
-   The investment round, led by Founders Fund, alongside Backed,
    Presight Capital, CPT Capital and Sustainable Food Ventures, will be
    used to develop its scalable production platform and build key
    talent in its research and development team.

**London, UK 9th February 2021**: [Hoxton
Farms](https://hoxtonfarms.com/) has announced a £2.7 million seed round
to cultivate animal fat and solve an urgent issue for the rapidly
growing meat alternatives market. Its approach delivers the missing
ingredient necessary to make meat alternatives delicious, realistic and
versatile: fat.

For decades, the food industry has faced the challenge of finding
effective, low-cost and sustainable replacements for traditional animal
fat, the most important sensory ingredient in meat. Fat defines how meat
looks, cooks, and tastes -- and it does this in a way that cannot be
replicated by plant oils currently used in meat alternatives.

**Dr Max Jamilly, Co-Founder of Hoxton Farms, said**, "We want to bring
back fat: it's the single most important ingredient in the meat that we
eat. The technology we're developing will allow us to customise fat for
any application -- and we're making it healthier too. Cultivated fat is
the hero ingredient for meat alternatives, and it will solve a huge
problem in this growing industry. We believe the future of meat
alternatives will be a blend of plant-based protein and cultivated fat."

Animal agriculture is responsible for almost 15 per cent of greenhouse
gas emissions and uses 30 per cent of habitable land and freshwater.
Demand for plant-based meat has grown 125 per cent in the last two
years, and according to Fortune Business Insights, the global meat
substitute market is expected to be worth \$8.15Bn by 2026. But there's
a big fat problem.

Existing meat alternatives contain plant oils as a substitute for animal
fat, but these oils have an enormous environmental impact and make
plant-based meat greasy and unpalatable. Hoxton Farms is working to
solve this problem using cultivated fat that is ethical and sustainable
without compromising taste and performance.

Starting with a tiny sample of animal cells, Hoxton Farms grows purified
animal fat in cultivators, much like the fermentors used for brewing
beer. This process is, however, expensive and difficult to scale. The
startup is solving this by using proprietary computational models to
reduce the cost.

**Ed Steele, Co-Founder of Hoxton Farms, commented,** "Our mathematical
approach drives everything we do at Hoxton Farms. We simulate the entire
process computationally, from biopsy to bacon. This "digital twin"
allows us to optimise every raw input in parallel, massively improving
the cost-efficiency and performance of our cultivated fat for our
customers."

Hoxton Farms' co-founders, Dr Max Jamilly, a synthetic biologist and
formerly part of Legendairy Foods, and Ed Steele, a mathematician and
former machine learning engineer at Thought Machine, met at nursery
school over 25 years ago and have been friends ever since. They teamed
up in 2020 to combine their expertise and build Hoxton Farms against the
backdrop of the pandemic.

**Steele continued,** "The Covid-19 crisis has exposed the fragility of
traditional meat supply chains and the risks they pose to human health
and the environment. We wanted to bring together our skills to address a
pressing problem: how to satisfy a growing demand for meat without
compromising on health, sustainability or animal ethics."

Hoxton Farms has received investment from leading Silicon Valley VC
Founders Fund, founded by Peter Thiel, alongside Backed, Presight
Capital, CPT Capital, Sustainable Food Ventures, and angel investors.

Hoxton Farms will use this seed investment to develop a proof of concept
of its production platform and build customer partnerships, helping the
startup to achieve its goal of supplying cultivated fat to the global
meat alternatives industry.

**Eric Scott, Principal at Founders Fund, added,** "The market for
plant-based meat has exploded in recent years, especially during the
pandemic. But plant-based meat has a long way to go -- and that's
because it's missing out on real cell-based animal fat. The team's
ability to tailor the precise sensory and functional properties of fat
allows them to produce exactly what their customers need. Hoxton Farms
has the potential to change an industry."

In the coming months, the startup will begin work at its new R&D lab in
Hoxton, London, and continue to grow its talented team of biologists and
mathematicians.

**Alex Brunicki, Partner at Backed, added,** *"*We're excited to invest
in Hoxton Farms and its talented team. Ed and Max are taking a
pioneering approach to drive down the cost of cellular agriculture by
combining their unique expertise in mathematical optimisation, machine
learning and gene regulatory networks. Hoxton Farms is building a unique
platform that will not only deliver cost reducing solutions that have
been out of reach for many other players in the space, but also provide
the flexibility to deliver unique cellular and sensory characteristics
at speed."

For more information go to <https://hoxtonfarms.com/>

ENDS

**Notes to Editors**

Hoxton Farms is hiring for roles that include Scientist, Senior
Scientist, Computational Biologist, Senior Computational Biologist, and
Bioprocess Engineer.

[**Press Kit
Here**](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1DTJi1F9J4_1phALXNoCUnTV5AZEE-f29?usp=sharing)

**Press Contact**

CEW Communications for Hoxton Farms, Cathy White,
<cathy@cewcommunications.com>, +(44)07791 232834

**About Hoxton Farms**

Founded in 2020, Hoxton Farms is growing real animal fat -- without
animals. They are developing cultivated fat as an ingredient for the
meat alternatives industry. Fat is the secret to unlocking
cost-effective and sustainable meat alternatives that look, cook and
taste like the real thing.

The company, co-founded by Dr Max Jamilly and Ed Steele, is based in
Hoxton, London.

**Co-Founder Biographies**

**Dr Max Jamilly**

Max has a decade's experience in life sciences, with a PhD from Oxford
in synthetic biology and two degrees from Cambridge in biotechnology and
business. Before co-founding Hoxton Farms, he worked in biotech VC and
consulted for deep tech, consumer healthcare and future food startups in
the UK, Europe and the US.

**Ed Steele**

Ed is a mathematician with master's degrees from Oxford and Imperial. He
started his career as a machine learning engineer at venture-backed
fintech startup Thought Machine. Next, he joined up with an Oxford
professor at QED Analytics, a mathematical modelling company solving
real-world problems in industries spanning genetics, sport, finance and
law.

**About Founders Fund**

Founders Fund invests in the world's most important and valuable
companies across all sectors and stages. The firm's partners have been
founders and early funders of companies including PayPal, SpaceX,
Palantir, Airbnb, Stripe and Facebook. Founders Fund pursues a
founder-friendly investment strategy, providing maximum support with
minimum interference. More information is available at
[www.foundersfund.com](http://www.foundersfund.com/).

**About BACKED**

BACKED is the human-centric venture capital fund. They invest in
exceptional founders, at Seed, in Europe, providing founders an
extensive support system to catalyse their development as company
operators and leaders. Founded in 2015 by partners Andre de Haes and
Alex Brunicki, BACKED invests across sectors including BioTech,
Entertainment, Financial Services, Industry 4.0 and more. Investments to
date include Hutch, Pollen, Thought Machine, LabGenius and THIS.
