---
title: "Cultured Meat: Future Protein and Medicine"
date: 2021-10-14 10:57:04
lastmod: 2021-10-14 10:57:04
slug: cultured-meat-future-protein-and-medicine
description: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 honorable mention essay. Roka Kakehi is an undergraduate chemistry major at the University of Pennsylvania."
excerpt: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 honorable mention essay. Roka Kakehi is an undergraduate chemistry major at the University of Pennsylvania."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Health]
regions: [International, Latin America & Caribbean]
flags: [NA]
essay_contest: [Honorable Mention]
contributors: [9862]
images: ["roka_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "roka_0.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 10000
uuid: 9863
---
***This is a [Student Essay Contest
2021](https://www.proteinreport.org/student-essay-contest-2021) honorable
mention essay. Roka Kakehi is an undergraduate chemistry major at the
University of Pennsylvania.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Studying abroad in Costa Rica for two years in high school was the
impetus for me to realize the close relationship between food,
particularly proteins, and health. One of the things which surprised me
was that whenever I walked around towns there, I saw far more overweight
people than I did in Japan, where I grew up. The Global Nutrition Report
states that Costa Rica has a high obesity rate with about 21.1% of adult
men and 30.4% of adult women struggling with obesity ("Country Nutrition
Profiles"). I thought about the reason behind this high rate, and then I
realized that the eating habits in Costa Rica are very different from
those in Japan, which has only 4% of the obesity prevalence rate ("Lower
Prevalence"). For instance, the proportion of carbohydrates per meal is
high and that of protein is low for Costa Rican meals on average. Most
of the traditional food there contains a lot of carbohydrates like Gallo
Pinto, which is a traditional breakfast made from rice and beans. This
habit causes the amount of protein intake to be low, and also the
protein sources are often fatty or fried meat. This was just my guess
about the high obesity rate in Costa Rica, but as I further gained
knowledge by myself, I encountered an idea of the protein leverage
hypothesis, which states that a decline in the ratio of protein intake
to carbohydrate and fat causes excess energy intake, which may lead to
obesity (Gosby et al. 1). Although this is not the only reason for the
high obesity rate, this learning experience made me desire to produce
new healthy food, especially protein.

As the situation in Costa Rica suggests, intaking balanced nutrients,
including proteins, is important for preventing diet-related
noncommunicable diseases. However, there are several issues and
obstacles that we need to overcome in order to achieve the future where
all people, including people in developing countries, have enough
protein sources and take nutritionally balanced meals. I believe that
cultured meat can contribute to solving these issues. Cultured meat is
made by growing muscle cells of livestock in the lab. I have been
studying and researching cultured meat as an undergraduate student. In
this essay, I argue that cultured meat can be our future protein source
which proposes a new possibility of protein as medicine as well as
creates a sustainable protein supply system.

Cultured meat can be an innovative way of preventing or curing lifestyle
diseases caused by imbalanced nutrition by supplying meat that has
optimized and personalized nutrition for each person. Meat is one of our
most common protein sources, but at the same time, eating meat can cause
noncommunicable diseases. For instance, it is said that high consumption
of red beef raises the risk of heart disease and diabetes ("What's the
Beef"). Although people should be aware of the nutrition of their diets
and change what they eat if necessary, it is not always easy for people
with or without lifestyle diseases to suddenly change their eating
habits, especially for people who love eating meat. Additionally,
planning a different menu for a person who has nutritional issues is
troublesome for the person as well as for their family members who make
meals. The person also might feel excluded by eating different meals
from their family members at the table. Cultured meat can reduce
people's stress of changing meals by supplying meat which looks exactly
the same as the traditional meat but contains more or different
nutrients. Since cultured meat is made by growing cells in the lab, it
is theoretically possible to design its composition by adding different
nutrients. For instance, we could remove saturated fats, which may
increase the risk of heart disease, and instead add polyunsaturated fats
like plant-based fats and DHA, which may reduce the risk of
cardiovascular disease (Lamarco). In this way, we will be able to
produce cultured meat which contains personalized and optimized
nutrients depending on the person's needs and health condition. People
can prevent disease by eating these nutritionally balanced cultured
meats. This is not possible for the current animal agriculture system
which makes meat directly by killing animals. Moreover, researchers are
trying to make cultured meat be cooked and look exactly the same as
traditional meat. Thus, people will not have to experience the trouble
of serving meats by different cooking methods nor ever feel isolated by
eating different foods with other people. Being able to choose
nutritionally enriched cultured meat in stores could be an easy first
step for people to change their eating habits for their health.

Cultured meat not only solves the problem of nutritional imbalance, but
also can be a solution to a significant issue of the protein industry:
there will be a lack of protein supply in the coming years because the
current livestock production is not sustainable. According to the
Population Division of the United Nations, the world population is
expected to grow by 2.3 billion people by 2050 ("Global Agriculture").
Having more people implies we will need more food than now, but it may
not be realistic to satisfy the growing food demand by continuing the
current ways of producing food, especially meat, an important protein
source. About 70% of all agricultural land is used for meat production,
and 18% of greenhouse gas emissions come from this industry (Fernández).
Being so unsustainable, meat production would still need to grow by over
200 million tons by 2050, and about 70 % of the increase would occur in
developing countries ("Global Agriculture"). However, the current
livestock industry is not sustainable enough to feed the growing
population. One of the reasons is that the worldwide high demand for
meat has caused environmental destruction, especially for developing
countries. For instance, the high demand for beef in the US has led to
deforestation in Costa Rica (Gerber et al. 80). In order to export more
beef, the forested lands have been converted to cattle pastures. Another
main reason is that growing farm animals consumes a lot of resources
like feed and water. More than 1,500 gallons of water are used to
produce one pound of beef (Howie). 36% of the world's crop calories are
used for animal feed (Plumer). These numbers imply how inefficient the
current livestock production is for feeding people.

Therefore, we need to find a new way of sustainably producing meat in
order to feed about 10 billion people in the future. I believe that
cultured meat is a great way to help us make the future possible. First
of all, cultured meat is made entirely in the lab. Thus, we do not need
huge lands like ranches to produce meat. This advantage will solve the
issue of transforming lands into farms and causing environmental
destruction. It will also be possible to produce meat in the middle of
big cities as long as we can find a place there to build a lab. This
will contribute to increasing countries' food self-sufficiency rate, and
cultured meat will be a valuable protein resource especially in the case
of natural disasters. Secondly, since cultured meat is made by taking
some cells from living animals and growing them outside of animals'
bodies, we do not need to grow as much livestock as the current animal
agricultural system. This means that by making cultured meat instead of
killing farm animals, we can reduce the amount of resources used for
meat production. Finally, since cultured meat is made in aseptic
conditions like the lab, it is free from infections caused by bacteria
like Salmonella (Chriki and Hocquette 3). We could also reduce the risk
of animal contact breakout because we would only use a few livestock for
producing cultured meat. For these reasons, cultured meat is a more
sustainable and safer way of producing meat, which will help us to
continue supplying proteins even when the world population
rapidly grows.

Cultured meat has a lot of potential as our future protein source, but
it also has obstacles to overcome to be actually eaten in the near
future. As an undergraduate student, I have been studying and
researching cultured meat in order to solve these obstacles and make
cultured meat a practical future protein source which resolves the
issues of the current protein industry. In my university, the University
of Pennsylvania, I study chemistry as a major and nutrition as a minor.
I am studying nutrition in order to learn the nutritional values of
food, especially meat, as well as noncommunicable diseases related to
nutrition. Since the nutrition courses of my university are offered by
the Nursing school, I have been able to learn not only the functions of
various nutrients, but also how diets can work as disease prevention.
For example, in a class named "Nutrition: Science & Applications," I
learned what kinds of proteins like ghrelin are involved in food intake
regulation and obesity. Acquiring this kind of knowledge will help me in
the future to produce cultured meat which contains different kinds of
nutrients for each person. I believe that studying chemistry in addition
to nutrition allows me to further understand what will happen to the
nutrients of cultured meat in our bodies and when cooked by learning the
chemical structures and reactions of nutrients. Outside the university,
I have been conducting research on cultured meat since last year at the
Institute of Advanced BioMedical Engineering and Science in Japan. My
current research evaluates the influence of temperature on the
efficiency of growing bovine muscle cells. I hope this research makes it
possible to produce more cultured meat in a shorter period of time in
the hope of contributing to resolving the issue of the lack of protein
supply in the future.

Although its technology is still being developed, I believe that
cultured meat will solve the protein-related issues by suggesting a new
way of how protein can be medicine and creating a new sustainable
protein supply system. One of my future goals is to solve the issue of
obesity in Costa Rica by incorporating cultured meat with nutrients I
designed to Costa Rican people's diets. I would like to continue
learning about cultured meat in the hope of contributing to a better
world by improving people's diets and health.

**Works Cited** Chriki, Sghaier, and Jean-François Hocquette. "The Myth
of Cultured Meat: A Review." frontiers in Nutrition, no. 7, 7 Feb. 2020,
p. 3,
<https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnut.2020.00007/full>.
Accessed 22 Sept. 2021.

"Country Nutrition Profiles --- Costa Rica." Global Nutrition Report,
[https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/latin-am...](https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/latin-america-and-caribbean/central-america/costa-rica/).
Accessed 17 Sept. 2021.

Fernández, Clara. "How can Cultured Meat solve World Hunger and Global
Warming?" Labiotech.eu, 18 Oct. 2016,
[https://www.labiotech.eu/trends-news/cultured-meat-world-hunger-global-...](https://www.labiotech.eu/trends-news/cultured-meat-world-hunger-global-warming/).
Accessed 19 Sept. 2021.

Gerber, Pierre, et al. "Livestock in a Changing Landscape: Experiences
and Regional Perspectives." Island Press, vol. 2, 29 Jan. 2010, p. 80,
<http://www.fao.org/3/am075e/am075e00.pdf>. Accessed 18 Sept. 2021.

"Global agriculture towards 2050." High Level Expert Forum,
[http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/wsfs/docs/Issues_papers/HLEF2050...](http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/wsfs/docs/Issues_papers/HLEF2050_Global_Agriculture.pdf).
Accessed 18 Sept. 2021.

Gosby, Alison K et al. "Testing protein leverage in lean humans: a
randomised controlled experimental study." PloS one, vol. 6, no. 10, 12
Oct. 2011, p. 1, <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22022472/>. Accessed
17 Sept. 2021.

Howie, Mike. "Cultured Meat Could Help Save the Environment." fisher
scientific, 2016,
[https://www.fishersci.com/us/en/scientific-products/publications/lab-re...](https://www.fishersci.com/us/en/scientific-products/publications/lab-reporter/2016/issue-1/cultured-meat-could-help-save-environment.html).
Accessed 19 Sept. 2021.

Lamarco, Nicky. "The Real Difference Between Saturated And Unsaturated
Fats." Health Digest, 30 Dec. 2020,
[https://www.healthdigest.com/304517/the-real-difference-between-saturat...](https://www.healthdigest.com/304517/the-real-difference-between-saturated-and-unsaturated-fats/).
Accessed 21 Sept. 2021.

"Lower Prevalence of Obesity in Japan due to Environmental Factors."
Pharmaceutical Technology, 28 Jan. 2020,
<https://www.pharmaceutical-technology.com/comment/low-obesity-japan/>.
Accessed 17 Sept. 2021.

Plumer, Brad. "How much of the world's cropland is actually used to grow
food?" Vox, 16 Dec. 2014,
<https://www.vox.com/2014/8/21/6053187/cropland-map-food-fuel-animal-feed>.
Accessed 19 Sept. 2021.

"What's the Beef with Red Meat?" Harvard Health Publishing, 1 Feb. 2020,
[https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/whats-the-beef-with-red-...](https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/whats-the-beef-with-red-meat).
Accessed 23 Sept. 2021.
