---
title: "Cellular Agriculture Australia Launches Pathways Tool for Students and Professionals"
date: 2021-03-16 16:37:34
lastmod: 2021-03-16 16:37:34
slug: cellular-agriculture-australia-launches-pathways-tool-students-and-professionals
description: "There is no shortage of intelligent and passionate people who want to get involved in cellular agriculture, but there are few resources directing them to the various pathways into the field. In order to solve this problem, Cellular Agriculture Australia has developed an online resource called “Pathways into Cellular Agriculture.”"
excerpt: "There is no shortage of intelligent and passionate people who want to get involved in cellular agriculture, but there are few resources directing them to the various pathways into the field. In order to solve this problem, Cellular Agriculture Australia has developed an online resource called “Pathways into Cellular Agriculture.”"
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat, Seafood]
topics: [Business, Sci-Tech]
regions: [Oceania]
flags: [Featured]
directory: [697, 698, 836, 7109, 7131]
contributors: [8107]
images: ["caa_pathways_image_720.jpg"]
featured_image: "caa_pathways_image_720.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 8600
---
"The number one question I get from students interested in cell ag is
'What do I need to study to get into the field?'" Director of Cellular
Agriculture Australia Dr. Bianca Le is also frequently queried by
professionals wondering how they can apply their expertise to
cellular agriculture.

A hallmark of many thriving industries is that people interested in
getting involved know how to do so, or at least are able to easily find
information pointing them in the right direction. But with cellular
agriculture being such a nascent and cross-disciplinary field, it is not
always apparent what skills students should learn or how professionals
might apply existing skills in order to launch or develop a career in
the industry.

"There is no shortage of intelligent and passionate people who want to
get involved in cellular agriculture, but there are few resources
directing them to the various pathways into the field, especially when
it comes to Australia," explains Le.

In order to solve this problem, Cellular Agriculture Australia has
developed an online resource called "Pathways into Cellular
Agriculture." The [pathways
tool](https://pathways.cellularagricultureaustralia.org/), as it is
affectionately called, is an interactive page on the Cellular
Agriculture Australia (CAA) website, through which students and
jobseekers can explore different entry points into the field.

Cultured meat researcher and CAA Secretary Lisa Musgrove, who helped
coordinate the tool's content, explained the main intuition governing
the design of this resource was that "users might be coming at it from
the perspective of either wanting to solve a particular research problem
or wanting to apply an existing area of expertise to
cellular agriculture."

As such, the tool's information is divided into two broad topics:
"Problems to Solve" and "Majors." Each of these is further divided into
more specific subtopics. The *Problems* section lists research gaps and
current white spaces, while *Majors* lists the disciplines that can be
applied to each problem. These ultimately direct the user to a page
displaying each of the Australian Universities with research
laboratories that have the capacity to solve the selected problems in
cellular agriculture.

Work on the pathways tool started in August 2020. Musgrove says that the
CAA team began to think about how an interactive tool could help
students and graduates connect academic course offerings to real
research problems in cell ag. "We already had an idea about what the
main research focus areas were, so we looked into those a little deeper
by accessing the great resources offered by the Good Food Institute and
New Harvest, as well as various papers that have been
published recently."

The team then browsed local universities for course offerings and
compared them with the positions being offered by various cell ag
companies in order to get a sense of which disciplines relate to each
research problem.

Team member Jo Tunna, who comes from a background in business
development, explains, "One of the most helpful resources we used was
the [GFI's student guide to navigating the alternative protein
space](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hAl_qJdEA6yfvnX266RcOrUzFbeAa4uChioF-X2byCQ/edit)
along with a series of *Medium* posts made by
[Wildtype](https://medium.com/@wild_type/wild-type-food-for-thought-4-4031781e39a6).
Those explored what the cell ag industry looks like today in terms of
talent, focus, and industry maturity as well as how this is likely to
shift in the years ahead."

The rapid development of the industry was one of the most interesting
things Le noticed during the process. "The field is moving so quickly,
it can be hard to keep up! The types of jobs that are required for this
emerging industry has changed rapidly over the past two years,
especially in Australia."

Her team has noticed that diversity of thought is one of the field's
most valued attributes. "When you look at the same role across different
cell ag companies, there is no one common way to get into the field. In
fact, companies often prefer non-traditional pathways for technical
positions because this industry is so unlike any other --- you really
need to be a lateral thinker. We knew early on that we had to
incorporate that philosophy into the pathways tool."

Musgrove says that she "was surprised at the large range of study fields
available to students in \[Australia\]. It's great to see that many of
our universities are at the cutting edge of so many areas in
biomedicine, biotechnology, and engineering. This certainly bodes well
for developing local talent in the cell ag space."

CAA was also able to use the opportunity to further grow their volunteer
community. CAA volunteer and University of Tasmania student Kianie
Langer says "I was interested in contributing to the pathways project
because I'd like to see cell ag blossom, and I believe the pathways tool
is a fantastic opportunity to show people of various educational
backgrounds that cell ag is diverse, having the potential to encompass
many fields of study and work."

{{< figure src="pathways tool.jpg" alt="The pathways tool was published on March 15th" caption="The pathways tool was published on March 15th. Development team members included Bianca Le, Lisa Musgrove, Kianie Langer, Jo Tunna, Avery Parkinson, and Nelson Gardner-Challis. Cellular Agriculture Australia." >}}

In terms of next steps, Le is thinking of helping other national
cellular agriculture nonprofits craft their own similar resource.

"Originally, we wanted to make a resource that could showcase all the
opportunities here in Australia --- from world-class stem cell research
centers to innovative startups working in the space. However, we also
want to share this resource with other organizations that want to
promote developing the cellular agriculture talent pipeline in their
region. That could include translating this tool into other languages or
adding your local universities or courses to the website."

Le says they have already had a few people reach out, including Cellular
Agriculture Canada. If you are interested in bringing your own version
of the pathways project to your country, please reach out to [Cellular
Agriculture Australia](https://cellularagricultureaustralia.org/).
