---
title: "How, Why and When Clean Agriculture Will Take Over the World"
date: 2021-01-20 16:44:10
lastmod: 2021-01-20 16:44:10
slug: how-why-and-when-clean-agriculture-will-take-over-world
description: "The confluence of the coronavirus pandemic of 2020, the rapid development of new food technologies and the rising global demand for protein mean that we are on the cusp of a huge and profitable investment wave into new forms of agriculture. The greatest beneficiaries of this investment wave will be cultured and plant-based foods."
excerpt: "The confluence of the coronavirus pandemic of 2020, the rapid development of new food technologies and the rising global demand for protein mean that we are on the cusp of a huge and profitable investment wave into new forms of agriculture. The greatest beneficiaries of this investment wave will be cultured and plant-based foods."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Seafood]
topics: [Business]
regions: [International]
flags: [Book Excerpt, Featured]
directory: [234, 694, 695, 1171, 5703, 5819, 5820, 5829, 5831, 6149, 8345]
contributors: [8280]
images: ["Moo's Law cover photo .png"]
featured_image: "Moo's Law cover photo .png"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 8281
---
**This is an excerpt from *Moo's Law: An Investor's Guide to the New
Agrarian Revolution*, the latest book by investor and entrepreneur Jim
Mellon. The book is available via Harriman House and Amazon. For further
information, visit [mooslawbook.com](https://mooslawbook.com/).**

The confluence of the coronavirus pandemic of 2020, the rapid
development of new food technologies and the rising global demand for
protein mean that we are on the cusp of a huge and profitable investment
wave into new forms of agriculture. The greatest beneficiaries of this
investment wave will be cultured and plant-based foods.

The worldwide plant-based meat market, excluding dairy substitutes and
other plant-based foods (such as tofu), is currently estimated to be
worth about US \$12 billion, with sales likely to reach US \$28 billion
by 2025. In the USA alone, the plant-based food market rose 29 per cent
from US \$3.9 billion to US \$5 billion, between 2017 and 2019 with the
plant-based meat market increasing from US \$682 million to US \$939
million. When considering that these figures do not include future
cultured meat sales, which I expect to be underway in some smaller
protein categories and geographies by then, the industry's cumulative
potential over the next decade will be substantially higher than
these projections.

At current consumption rates, and at current population growth
projections, it is estimated that by 2050 the production of meat around
the world will double, to over 500 billion kilograms per year. The world
cannot sustain this level of production, when considering the scarce
resources of land and water and the overuse of pesticides, fertilisers
and antibiotics that such a level would necessitate. Nor can the planet
afford an increase in greenhouse gas emissions, further deforestation,
and the continual devastating loss of biodiversity.

When viewed against this backdrop, the production of alternative protein
such as plant-based formulations and cell-based meat, as well as
animal-free forms of producing materials, will be a key factor not only
in meeting our future food needs, but, in doing so, saving our planet
as well.

A key feature of plant-based and cultured foods is the transparency of
the manufacturing process when compared to traditional animal-derived
food production, as will be explained in more detail in this chapter.

This transparency will ultimately drive a move towards greater adoption
of these products and, importantly for investors, will divert
consumption dollars towards genuinely clean food.

Currently, most companies in the field are private, but increasing
numbers are expected to go public in the next few years, offering
investors the chance to participate in a major boom. In the investment
section of this book, I triage what I believe to be the best of them,
covering the gamut of meats, both plant- and cell-based, as well as
by-products, and the 'picks and shovels' that are making the
revolution happen.

In this chapter, there follows a brief description of the range of
technologies used in the creation of these new foods and products; an
analysis of where, how and when the resulting products will be sold; and
an estimate of their market and investment potential.

Broadly speaking, the New Agrarian Revolution can be split into three
main investment areas: plant-based, cellular agriculture, and enabling
technologies and tools.

The plant-based food producers are already the subjects of heavy
investor interest, and their products have been rapidly gaining market
share. These plant-based foods include burgers -- such as the famous
*Beyond Burger* and *Impossible Burger* -- but also many other meat
substitutes, including chicken, pork, beef, and, of course, seafood.
Included in the plant-based market are substitutes for cow's milk made
from soy, almonds, rice, and oats. There are also many animal-free
product lines in snacks, pet food and baby food. While undoubtedly
successful in most cases, companies involved in this sector generally
have more limited intellectual property than those in the cell-cultured
space, and are more reliant on superior marketing and manufacturing
skills to establish their brands.

The second investment area is a fast-developing, yet thus far largely
under-the-radar, business of using biotechnology, typically cell
culture, to replicate meats, seafoods, dairy products, leathers, and
proteins. This industry has the potential to create novel 'engineered'
foods which will not relate to any existing animal or fish species.

This sector is most interesting from an investor's point of view. It is
at an earlier stage of development than the plant-based sector but has
huge momentum behind it. In my view, its products are likely to be in
wide dispersal within 10 years, if not sooner, with sales likely in the
next 18 months at a small production launch.

The third investment area pertains to the tools-and-technologies
industry that enables clean foods: namely machinery, feedstock ('growth
media'), and other elements necessary to fuel the new food revolution.
There are currently some investable companies in this area, but many of
the means of production are held within large companies where the effect
of increased sales in this area are diluted by size, which limits their
investment potential.

When I embarked on this book, I had no idea that the processes involved
in making the spectrum of clean foods were so complex, involving high
science and research and development, particularly in cellular
agriculture. I have tried to describe the salient features of these
processes to reduce them to a simple, bite-sized (excuse the pun!)
precis, giving readers some idea of how our food will be produced
in future.

While there is a wide variety of new foods and therefore a wide variety
of production methods, plant-based foods are generally produced by
extrusion. Cell-based products are produced in bioreactors, where
different cell lines are provided with nutrients. These include sugars,
salts, vital amino acids and growth factors (hormones) that replicate
the natural process of growing meat on the body of an animal, without
the slaughter and other downsides of traditional animal husbandry.

There are, in addition, other forms of food made by biotech processes,
including yeast-based foods and proteins made -- literally -- from thin
air and electricity.

Cellular agriculture still lags behind in comparison to the production
and commercialisation curves of the plant-based sector, but it is
catching up rapidly, and offers the prospect of defensible IP, lower
costs, and greater efficiencies in production. I estimate that in 10
years, products made in bioreactors will be sold at scale in most parts
of the world.

This is the industry about which I hold the most optimistic viewpoint,
and the one into which I would recommend the highest investment
concentration, with portfolio additions from the plant-based foods
industry, which is here and now with its products.

\*\*\*

The New Agrarian Revolution is happening now, and as with every new
promising industry, there will be plenty of public companies to choose
from in due course. At the moment, however, the pickings on the public
markets are few and far between, because most of the promising companies
are sequencing through their various pre-IPO listing rounds of funding.

These rounds start with a founders' round, then go onto a seed round,
followed by a number of alphabetically named 'Series' rounds (Series A,
Series B, etc.), and are typical of angel- and venture
capital-funded companies.

This book contains a list of all of the promising and not-so-promising
companies involved in the cell ag, plant-based, alt-materials, and picks
and shovels companies, rated by myself and my investment colleagues,
Anthony Chow and Laura Turner.

Many of these companies are rated on the basis of our perception of
quality of management, business plan, the competitive landscape for
their products, and valuation, which generally is referenced either to
open rounds of financing or our expectation of valuation at the
next round.

The few available listed companies are rated also, although I recommend
that investors do not buy the shares of 'traditional' food producers on
the basis of any exposure to 'new' food or materials companies, or to
their own-brand plant-based foods, as the impact of these will generally
be very diluted in the context of the sheer size of these companies.
There are a few investable companies that are already public, including
the excellent Beyond Meat, and Sartorius in picks and shovels. But
generally speaking, investors must either find a way of investing
directly, or wait for IPOs to come along, or invest in a
collective vehicle.

In a bit more detail:

Wait for promising cell ag and cell-material companies, as well as picks
and shovel companies, to go public. I would recommend that anyone who is
interested in participating in the IPOs of any of these companies
contact them directly and put themselves on relevant mailing lists.

Investors who have a bit more to spend (and by this I would suggest US
\$100,000 per company) might put themselves forwards as candidates to
invest in whatever the next round of funding a company is contemplating,
and contact the company directly.

Invest in an investment vehicle that covers the area. At the moment, the
only vehicle I know of for retail investors to gain direct exposure to
cell ag is Agronomics, in which I have a major interest. However, I
expect such vehicles to multiply as the New Agrarian Revolution gathers
pace, and the website will be updated accordingly as they appear. 

There will be some standalone successes, including Beyond Meat and
Impossible in plant-based foods, and several cell ag companies in
seafood, meat, and materials, but most companies will either:

-   **Fold.** There will be increasing competition throughout the
    sector, and marginal players with inadequate management, poor IP,
    poor execution, or thin balance sheets will likely go bust. This is
    the way of the capitalist world and is a reason why investors should
    be diversified, do deep homework or place their investments in the
    sector with experienced teams.
-   **Sold.** Many existing food companies or materials companies will
    want to, and indeed in some cases are actively doing so, get in on
    the revolution that is underway. They will open their cheque books,
    and in my opinion, most of the good quality companies (see my
    ratings for this) will be bought in the next five years or so. This
    is where exceptional returns can be made. 
-   **Bold.** Companies that are daring enough not to sell out, with the
    vision to build brands and distribution and raise significant sums,
    are likely to grow into large enterprises in their own right. Beyond
    is a good example, but likely JUST, Mosa Meat, BlueNalu, Memphis
    Meats, Meatable and VitroLabs will be in this category, along with
    some others. This requires bold entrepreneurship and high-quality
    backers. 

So let's move on to the BEST company list -- based on my opinion and the
opinion of my colleagues and experts I have spoken to. It is a list of
those companies that represent the crème de la crème of the industry.
Think of this as a fantasy football team of what an IDEAL portfolio of
New Agrarian Revolution companies looks like.

These companies are also selected as the ones most likely to IPO in the
near future, and therefore could be viable stock picks in the years to
come. Beyond Meat (NASDAQ: BYND), is currently the only publicly
available company on this list, but there is no reason why Impossible
Foods, The Meatless Farm, The Not Company or the LIVEKINDLY Collective,
could not shoot for an IPO in the next couple of years.

{{< figure src="Moo's Law cover.png" alt="Moo's Law cover" >}}
