---
title: "From Circuits to Cells"
date: 2021-11-03 08:55:05
lastmod: 2021-11-03 08:55:05
slug: circuits-cells
description: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 runner-up. Nam Tran is a Biophysics PhD candidate in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Swinburne University of Technology."
excerpt: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 runner-up. Nam Tran is a Biophysics PhD candidate in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Swinburne University of Technology."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Sci-Tech]
regions: [International, Oceania]
flags: [NA]
essay_contest: [Runner-up]
contributors: [9839]
images: ["namtran_0.jpeg"]
featured_image: "namtran_0.jpeg"
draft: false
weight: 9000
uuid: 9840
---
***This is a [Student Essay Contest
2021](https://www.proteinreport.org/student-essay-contest-2021) runner-up.
Nam Tran is a Biophysics PhD candidate in the Department of Physics and
Astronomy at Swinburne University of Technology.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All meat is made from small biological machines called cells. Cells
naturally grow in living organisms, like cows and sheep. As such, for
most of human history, our way of obtaining cells for meat consumptions
has been through animal agriculture. However, with the increasing demand
for meat, animal agriculture had to industrialise on scales never seen
before. This has led to new problems such as biodiversity loss and
antimicrobial resistance. With developments of modern technology, cells
can now be grown within lab cultures. Cultured cells are just like their
animal counterparts -- having the exact same appearance, structure, and
function. As such, they too can be used to make meat for our everyday
consumption. The farming of cultured cells for meat is known as cellular
agriculture and offers potential solutions to problems encountered by
our modern-day industrialised animal agriculture. However, these
proposed solutions are not without their own challenges. One such
challenge is cell optimisation --- the task of growing cells faster and
more efficiently. The inner workings of cells are often represented by
signalling circuits, like that in Figure 1. Signalling circuits have
vulnerabilities. These vulnerabilities allow us to potentially influence
cellular outcomes and fates. My research attempts to understand and
predict where these vulnerabilities may lie in different circuits. For
short, let us call this "circuit analysis". Circuit analysis helps
tackle the cell optimisation challenge by providing: predictions,
biological insights and avenues into more "natural"
optimisation methods.

Figure 1: A signalling circuit, representing the internal processes of a
cell.

Circuit analysis provides predictions of optimal cell behaviour. One way
it does this is by quantitatively interpreting signalling circuits. Much
of our understanding of the molecular processes occurring within cells
come from diagrams called signalling circuits. Signalling circuits are
like blueprints to the cell. They give us a qualitative description of
what and where different processes occur --- including processes
important to farming cells like growth and proliferation. Therefore, to
maximise our cell harvest while minimising resources spent, we must
optimise these respective molecular processes. However, the qualitative
description offered by circuit diagrams do not provide enough
information to do so. Optimisation requires a quantitative description,
rather than qualitative. Circuit analysis does just this. It transforms
circuit diagrams into mathematical equations that tell us the conditions
needed for optimum performance. These equations serve as predictive
tools for minimising time and resources spent on culturing cells.
Another way circuit analysis predicts optimal cell behaviour is helping
design new circuit architectures. When a cell fails to behave in a
desired way, we may need to modify its internal circuitry so that it
exhibits desirable behaviours. Thus, if a cell takes too long to grow or
consumes too many resources, it may need to be enhanced by modifying its
circuitry. This modification requires knowing the right circuit
architecture corresponding to the efficiency we desire. Fortunately,
this can be calculated. Signalling circuits are like Lego. Similar to
how smaller blocks can be assembled into larger blocks of desired
architecture, smaller circuits can be connected into larger circuits of
desired optimum conditions. Knowing the equations of two separate
circuits means you know the equation of their connected pair. Knowing
the equations of three separate circuits means you know the equation of
their connected triplet, and so on. One can therefore obtain the
equations, and hence predict the optimal conditions, for any circuit
architecture required using only precursor knowledge of smaller circuits
from circuit analysis. That is, circuit analysis provides building
blocks to predict optimal conditions of new circuits. By allowing us to
predict optimal cell behaviour in existing and new signalling circuits,
circuit analysis can help farm cells faster and more efficiently.

Figure 2: Going from circuit (left) to equation (centre) to prediction
(right).

Circuit analysis can provide useful biological insights for cell
optimisation. One example of this is with EGF-stimulated cells. EGF is a
protein often associated with triggering cell proliferation. Stimulating
a group of cells with EGF can help speed up their population growth and,
hence, the harvest time for cells in a culture. However, for rat adrenal
cells, EGF has been observed to trigger cell death in certain dosages
\[1\]. This would present a problem if one were to try speed up cell
production using EGF and end up doing the opposite. To explain this
contradictory behaviour, my research attempts to study two special
signalling circuits called the ERK pathway and the Akt pathway. These
pathways are not unique to rat adrenal cells. They are common to a
variety of cell types across many different species, including those in
the meat we consume. As such, if we can identify the vulnerabilities
causing cell death in these signalling circuits, then it may provide
insight into how we can avoid triggering death when attempting to speed
up population doubling time. A faster doubling time will mean less
resources spent on running the bioreactor. As such, circuit analysis is
a key to unlocking biological insights for optimisation applications.

Lastly, circuit analysis provides avenues into more "natural"
optimisation methods. Cultured meat, by itself, already suffers from
unacceptance due to its perceived unnaturalness and evoked disgust
\[2,3\]. As beneficial as genetic modification can be for nutrition and
food quality, adding GMO to the name may only deter hesitant consumers
even more. To sway this target audience away from traditional meat and
towards cultured meat, non-GMO cultured meat is perhaps the best
compromise. This, however, takes away all the optimisation tools offered
by tweaking the internal cell circuitry. Fortunately, noninvasive
optimisation is still an option. One way circuit analysis helps with
this is by exploiting signalling circuits connected to the cell surface,
as opposed to the genes within the cell nucleus. A connection to the
surface often means an interaction with the outside environment. This
allows us to control cellular processes via external stimulation at
these surface connections, like illustrated in Figure 2 (above). As an
example, consider the ERK pathway mentioned earlier. The noninvasive
method to activate the circuit would be to expose the cell surface to
EGF and let that trigger the circuit, whereas the invasive method would
be to probe into the cell and manually activate the proteins inside. If
we can figure out how to obtain the same optimisation effect as
genetically modifying a signalling circuit, from only clever use of
external signals outside the cell, then we can avoid labels like that
deter consumers like "GMO". It is perhaps unlikely that "natural" and
"unnatural" optimisation can achieve the same results, but it is a
candidate bridge between traditional meat and "engineered" meat. Circuit
analysis provides potentially useful tools for this bridge.

To solve the challenges of cell agriculture, we need to tackle the cell
optimisation problem. Studying signalling circuits and identifying their
vulnerabilities, offers an approach to optimising cells. It does this by
providing three things: quantitative tools to predict conditions of
optimal cell behaviour, biological insights for cell optimisation
methods, and avenues for understanding "natural" optimisation. Achieving
cell optimisation allows us to increase resource efficiency and scale up
production. This in turn means more sustainable and affordable meat,
encouraging the displacement of meat from our current unsustainable
industrialised animal agriculture methods -- freeing up land to restore
biodiversity and mitigating the risk of practices that lead to medical
issues like antimicrobial resistance.

**References**

\[1\] Ningsih, Z. and Clayton, A.H., 2020. Does frequency-dependent cell
proliferation exhibit a Fano-type resonance?. Physical biology,
17(4), p.044001.

\[2\] Siegrist, M. and Hartmann, C., 2020. Perceived naturalness,
disgust, trust and food neophobia as predictors of cultured meat
acceptance in ten countries. Appetite, 155, p.104814.

\[3\] Laestadius, L.I. and Caldwell, M.A., 2015. Is the future of meat
palatable? Perceptions of in vitro meat as evidenced by online news
comments. Public health nutrition, 18(13), pp.2457-2467.
