---
title: "Investing in the Cultivated Meat Industry: An Independent Analysis of Agronomics"
date: 2021-07-06 09:48:24
lastmod: 2021-07-06 09:48:24
slug: investing-cultivated-meat-industry-independent-analysis-agronomics
description: "Rarely do retail investors have the opportunity to gain exposure and access to a new technology this early. That’s partly because Agronomics — which bills itself as “a thematic investment play into the clean meat sector” — is one of the only publicly traded options available to those who see the potential in cultivated meat."
excerpt: "Rarely do retail investors have the opportunity to gain exposure and access to a new technology this early. That’s partly because Agronomics — which bills itself as “a thematic investment play into the clean meat sector” — is one of the only publicly traded options available to those who see the potential in cultivated meat."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat, Seafood]
topics: [Business]
regions: [International]
flags: [Featured, Analysis]
directory: [234, 694, 695, 698, 5817, 5819, 5820, 5821, 5829, 5831, 5836, 6149, 7964, 8329]
contributors: [8172]
images: ["lead image_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "lead image_0.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 9188
---
***Disclosure: I am invested in Agronomics. This analysis is for
informational purposes only and is not investment advice. I am not an
investment advisor, nor am I compensated by Agronomics, Protein Report,
or any other entity for this content.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> *Well, certainly, in 10 years many things will evolve; technology will
> change ... But I would always encourage people, when they think about
> ten years, to ask the question, what won't change? --- Jeff Bezos*

In the last ten years, the average American has witnessed sweeping
changes at the supermarket. What began as a handful of brands offering
soy-based hamburger patties and a few pricey dairy alternatives to a
niche customer has become a multi-billion-dollar consumer sector.

But alternative proteins are at an interesting crossroads; despite their
growing popularity in the United States, those in the developing world
--- where populations are growing most rapidly --- still hunger for the
real thing.

So when one of the most successful entrepreneurs in history advises us
to consider what *won't* be different ten years from now, a strong
global demand for meat is a reliable answer.

We know this because the data backs it up: In virtually every culture,
as wealth increases, so too does animal protein consumption.

Meat demand will continue to grow as the population increases, and the
world can't produce enough meat through conventional animal farming
alone. This is as succinct and persuasive an argument as can be made for
investing in cultivated meat and alternative protein.

**Investment Overview**

Investing in this sector has been incredibly lucrative for those who got
in early. For instance, those who saw the potential of Beyond Meat rode
that wave to one of the [most successful IPOs in the last
decade](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/beyond-meat-soars-163-in-biggest-popping-us-ipo-since-2000-2019-05-02),
and the company is currently valued at \$9 billion.

It's a staggering figure but it's important to note that plant-based
protein companies are still nibbling at the edge of meat --- the
consumption of which is both a massive sustainability dilemma *and* a
\$1.7-trillion-dollar market that continues to grow.

Alternative protein, despite the notable successes of Beyond Meat,
Impossible Foods, and a handful of others companies, is still in its
infancy. That means that there's still plenty of opportunity for
investors interested in this steadily growing sector. But for those
investors drawn to cutting-edge technology, cultivated meat may be an
even more attractive prospect.

Rarely do retail investors have the opportunity to gain exposure and
access to a new technology this early. That's partly because Agronomics
--- which bills itself as "a thematic investment play into the clean
meat sector" --- is one of the only publicly traded options available to
those who see the potential in cultivated meat. By offering investors a
deep portfolio of companies engaged in the work of getting cultivated
meat to market, the risk to the individual of backing a company whose
tech doesn't pan out is somewhat mitigated.

**The Potential of Cultivated Meat Technology**

While consumers have become savvier over the last ten years about
alternative proteins --- as well as seeking out more responsibly sourced
and humane conventional meat products --- cultivated meat offers several
distinct advantages investors should consider.

No other protein source asks for so little change in consumer
preference. The product is still animal meat. Other alt-proteins require
consumers to adapt to a product that is "similar" to meat --- whereas
cultivated meat represents the potential for rapid mass adoption.

The first forays into cultivated meat date back to 2013 when Mark Post
received funding from [Sergey
Brin](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/aug/05/google-sergey-brin-synthetic-beef-hamburger)
and other investors to create the world's first cultivated burger, which
cost approximately \$300,000 to produce. Post went on to co-found Mosa
Meat, which is in the Agronomics portfolio.

Creating cultivated meat has been described as a process similar to
fermenting beer, however, there are significant differences. At a basic
level, cultivated meat is grown from animal cells in a bioreactor using
growth media. The cells may leverage a scaffolding material to form a
"structured" meat like steak or a chicken breast --- or "unstructured,"
as with ground beef.

While this technology as applied to the creation of cultivated meat may
be novel, its roots are in biomedical engineering, where similar
techniques have long been used. The result is "real" meat, unlike the
plant-based proteins currently offered by Beyond Meat or Impossible
Foods. However, after the initial biopsy to obtain starter cells,
animals are completely removed from the process --- a critical step
toward addressing climate change and [preventing future
pandemics](https://www.unep.org/resources/report/preventing-future-zoonotic-disease-outbreaks-protecting-environment-animals-and).

**Market Projections**

A recent [RethinkX
report](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/585c3439be65942f022bbf9b/t/5d7fe0e83d119516bfc0017e/1568661791363/RethinkX+Food+and+Agriculture+Report.pdf)
forecast alternative proteins from cultivated meat, plant-based
products, and fermentation to completely disrupt animal agriculture. The
report's authors concluded that "by 2035, demand for cow products will
have shrunk by 80% to 90%. Other livestock markets such as chicken, pig,
and fish will follow a similar trajectory."

Although slightly less bullish in its forecast, a [2019
analysis](https://www.kearney.com/documents/20152/2795757/How+Will+Cultured+Meat+and+Meat+Alternatives+Disrupt+the+Agricultural+and+Food+Industry.pdf/06ec385b-63a1-71d2-c081-51c07ab88ad1)
conducted by global consultancy AT Kearney offers additional information
which should be of particular interest to investors: Researchers there
estimate that, by 2040, 60% of meat will come from plant-based or
cultivated meat. Even under more conservative scenarios, the industry
stands to grow tremendously as consumers continue to make the switch
away from animal-based products.

Cultivated meat made its debut in December of 2020, when Eat Just's
cultivated chicken nuggets went to market in Singapore. Additionally,
cellular aquaculture company BlueNalu has stated they plan to launch a
cultivated seafood product in the US this year, while Upside Foods
(formerly known as Memphis Meats) and several other startups will likely
bring products to market within the next 18 months. News items like
these are educating the consumer base about new products, as well as
priming public consciousness for near-term developments.

Venture capital is taking notice. Upside Foods raised a [\$161 million
Series B
round](https://www.forbes.com/sites/michaelpellmanrowland/2020/01/22/memphis-meats-raises-161-million-series-b-funding-round-aims-to-bring-cell-based-products-to-consumers-for-the-first-time/?sh=4c976a00428d)
in early
2020[,](https://www.forbes.com/sites/michaelpellmanrowland/2020/01/22/memphis-meats-raises-161-million-series-b-funding-round-aims-to-bring-cell-based-products-to-consumers-for-the-first-time/?sh=4c976a00428d)
only to be outdone in March of this year with a [\$200 million
raise](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/03/25/plant-based-food-company-eat-just-nabs-200-million-investment.html)
by Eat Just. In May, Eat Just's GOOD Meat division secured an additional
\$170 million in funding.

{{< figure src="Cultivated Meat Companies by Funding_0.jpg" alt="Table 1: Cultivated meat companies by funding" caption="Table 1: Cultivated meat companies by funding. Agronomics portfolio companies highlighted in green. Source: Crunchbase." >}}

**Investment Opportunity Overview**

Agronomics (LSE: ANIC) is listed on the London Stock Exchange and
currently has a market cap of \$280 million. The company was founded in
2011 as Port Erin Biopharma and was focused on biotech. In 2019, it
transitioned to a focus on alternative proteins and was
renamed Agronomics.

As mentioned above, Agronomics is one of a handful of vehicles that
offers retail investors exposure to the cultivated meat industry. Others
include Meat-Tech 3D (NASDAQ: MITC), an Israeli cultivated meat company,
and Eat Beyond Global (CSE: EATS), a Canadian fund.

VCs and accredited investors typically get the first opportunity when
investing in private companies that are leveraging cutting-edge
technology --- but they also take on the inherent risks. Agronomics
represents a unique opportunity to invest in potentially disruptive
startups before their IPO or acquisition by publicly traded companies.

Agronomics was the cultivated meat industry's most active investor in
2020, according to the Good Food Institute's [2020 State of the Industry
Report](https://gfi.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/COR-SOTIR-Cultivated-Meat-2021-0429.pdf).
Their investments that year included BlueNalu, Meatable, CellX, Mosa
Meat, SuperMeat, and Shiok Meats.

The portfolio includes a cohort of the most well-capitalized companies
across the pork, beef, and seafood verticals, but they are not focused
exclusively on cultivated meat. They are also invested in precision
fermentation (e.g., real dairy made without cows), cultivated leather,
and cultivated pet food. Lastly, their investments in plant-based
proteins round out a complete three-pillar, alt-protein portfolio.

{{< figure src="Agronomics Portfolio.jpg" alt="Table 2: Agronomics portfolio details" caption="Table 2: Agronomics portfolio details. Market caps calculated based on Agronomics [investor resources](https://agronomics.im/latest-news/) and press releases." >}}

Table 2 contains portfolio details. The market capitalizations are
calculated based on post-money valuation from the most recent funding
rounds and ownership percent described in Agronomics' public financial
statements. Consider BlueNalu; Agronomics has a 6% stake in the company
with an estimated valuation of \$300 million. [Previous
analysis](https://www.proteinreport.org/reading-tea-leaves-first-cultivated-meat-ipo)
of a successful BlueNalu scale-up modeled a \$10 billion valuation in
the next 5-10 years.

**Lead Investor**

Jim Mellon is the lead investor behind Agronomics. He's made big bets on
longevity, food technology, and climate change as investment
meta-thematics for the next 50 years. In addition to being an investor,
Mellon's a public figure, writing investment blog posts for [Master
Investor](https://masterinvestor.co.uk/economics/mellon-on-the-markets-gold-and-what-comes-next/)
and frequenting CNBC and financial media to offer analysis and opinions.
Most relevant for investing in cultivated meat, Mellon is the author of
*Moo's Law, An Investor's Guide to the New Agrarian Revolution*. For a
deep dive into Mellon's view on the industry, this author [interviewed
him](https://www.proteinreport.org/investing-new-agrarian-revolution-interview-jim-mellon)
for Protein Report.

Prior to his focus on the food industry, Mellon wrote a book about the
longevity industry,
[*Juvenescence*](https://www.juvenescence-book.com/), and created a
company with the same name. Juvenescence has made [11
investments](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/juvenescence/recent_investments)
and developed pharmacological and consumer products in-house for the
longevity industry. Although the [2020 IPO was
delayed](https://www.longevity.technology/juvenescence-moves-ipo-to-second-half-of-2020/),
the company is valued at \$500 million.

**Risk Assessment Overview**

With all this investing opportunity comes a proportional risk ---
especially considering that much of the tech behind cultivated meat is
still largely untested. While it's possible that investment in this
sector could pan out in a similar way to what we saw with Bitcoin (where
a risk-averse Wall Street didn't see the same value in cryptocurrencies
as did many speculative traders), it's not a given so it's important to
accurately assess all possible pitfalls.

The risks outlined below are arranged from macro- to firm-level to cover
as much of the potential risk landscape as possible but are not ranked
by probability or severity.

**Macroeconomic Risk:** Agronomics is listed within a sub-market of the
London Stock Exchange called the Alternative Investment Market (AIM).
Investing in anything on an international exchange characterizing itself
as "alternative" should give even the most intrepid retail investor
pause when stepping off the well-trod path of the S&P 500. In the event
of an economic downturn, it's likely that many of these positions would
be the first to go in a liquidity crunch.

**Currency Risk:** Agronomics is based in the UK and over the last five
years, the British sterling exchange rate for \$1 has ranged from £0.69
to £0.86. Post-Brexit, investors should be prepared for the possibility
of increased volatility in exchange rates.

**Technology Scalability/Cost-Reduction:** Cultivated meat could be a
technology that fails, or is simply 20 years ahead of its time, much
like Google Glass. There are still challenges to cost-parity with the
legacy meat industry. An order of Eat Just's cultivated chicken nuggets,
for instance, is currently sold for \$24 at a high-end Singapore
restaurant. Further, there are [analysts who remain
skeptical](https://engrxiv.org/795su/) of cultivated meat's scalability
and the cost-reduction capability necessary to make the product go
mainstream. The primary cost-driver is the growth media to feed the
cells --- and reducing this cost is the Holy Grail of the cultivated
meat industry.

That said, the price is falling rapidly, drawing comparisons to examples
cited in Mellon's book, [*Moo's
Law*](https://mooslawbook.com/the-book/), and the work of Ron Shigeta
("[Lab-Grown Meat Is Scaling Like the
Internet](https://rshigeta.medium.com/lab-grown-meat-is-scaling-like-the-internet-540893cbaf57)").
Furthermore, Agronomics also holds investments in plant-based and
fermentation proteins to hedge the technology risk of
cultivated protein.

**Management Performance:** In addition to Mellon, who serves as
Agronomics' Non-Executive Director, the board and management team
includes Finance Director, [Denham
Eke](https://www.burnbrae.com/about-us/denham-eke). Eke also leads the
management team at the Burnbrae Group alongside Mellon. Burnbrae is a
private international asset management company with a broad portfolio
across financial services, IT, leisure, and life sciences. [Anthony
Chow](https://www.linkedin.com/in/anthony-chow-cfa-3a29b729/) is
Agronomics' Co-founder and CFA and has been with Burnbrae since 2007.
[Richard Reed](https://www.jamjarinvestments.com/about) serves as
Chairman and his past experience includes co-founding Innocent Drinks,
which was acquired by Coca-Cola in 2013. Following his departure, Reed
launched Jam Jar Investments with his Innocent Drinks co-founders.
Rounding out the Agronomics team is [David
Giampaolo](https://www.linkedin.com/in/david-giampaolo-4748a15/), who
serves as a Non-Executive Director, and is the Founder and Chief
Executive of Pi Capital.

**Agronomics Fund Structure:** Instead of providing a dividend,
Agronomics offers the flexibility to pursue products and ventures in
cultivated meat with revenue generated from portfolio companies. It's
not structured as a 10-year VC fund that will be dissolved and returned
to shareholders. All shares are described as common shares.

**Startup Risk:** Jim Mellon has publicly stated (including in a
[podcast with this
writer](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/brave-new-meat/id1531974488?i=1000511128752))
that Agronomics intends not only to further invest in companies in this
sector but to also find the white space to launch a company. This is
similar to his approach with Juvenescence and, while exciting, presents
additional risk beyond picking successful startups for investment.

**Conclusion**

There's little doubt about the need for a radically new approach to
global protein production and consumption. While the issues driving this
need are likely top-of-mind to Protein Report readers, readily
available, public-facing information about investing in this sector is
still not as accessible as it should be.

No investment is without risk, particularly when the technology behind
it is as untested by scalability and capability pressures as those in
cultivated meat. However, early access to new technology in a nascent
industry certainly offers its share of possibility and may be a unique
opportunity for the right investor.
