---
title: "JUST Egg Launches National ‘Really Good Eggs’ Brand Campaign"
date: 2021-09-22 16:09:34
lastmod: 2021-09-22 16:09:34
slug: just-egg-launches-national-really-good-eggs-brand-campaign
company: 234
description: "Eat Just, Inc., a company that applies cutting-edge science and technology to create healthier, more sustainable foods, today announced the launch of a bold new multi-million-dollar brand campaign for its popular plant-based JUST Egg products."
excerpt: "Eat Just, Inc., a company that applies cutting-edge science and technology to create healthier, more sustainable foods, today announced the launch of a bold new multi-million-dollar brand campaign for its popular plant-based JUST Egg products."
proteins: [Plant-Based]
products: [Eggs]
topics: [Business]
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [234]
images: ["268961.png"]
featured_image: "268961.png"
draft: false
uuid: 9729
---
**Comedian J.B. Smoove ushers viewers through relatable morning
scrambles** 

SAN FRANCISCO \-- Eat Just, Inc., a company that applies cutting-edge
science and technology to create healthier, more sustainable foods,
today announced the launch of a bold new multi-million-dollar brand
campaign for its popular plant-based JUST Egg products. The "Really Good
Eggs" campaign kicks off this week with a series of ads distinctively
narrated by comedian and JUST Egg mega-fan J.B. Smoove, known for his
role on HBO's "Curb Your Enthusiasm," which returns for an 11th season
this fall.

Each "Really Good Eggs" spot puts viewers in the center of a different
morning scramble, while challenging presumptions about plant-based food.
Viewers meet [Wayne](https://vimeo.com/605056443), who had a big night
out and just wants a \"bomb-ass egg
sandwich;" [Jane](https://vimeo.com/605055963), who is "up too
f\*\*\*ing early" making eggs for toddler Tommy;
and [Kelly](https://vimeo.com/605056335), who "after years of swiping
right on human garbage" is smitten with the man of her dreams who
happens to be vegan. The ads will air on broadcast and cable television
in major markets like Chicago, Los Angeles and New York City and will
appear nationally on connected TV platforms like Hulu as well as on
digital video services like YouTube. To watch all three ads,
visit [ju.st/ads](http://ju.st/ads).

"Our ads aim at the truth. People can't care about the health of the
planet or their family all of the time. We want to disarm people and
their presuppositions about plant-based foods with insightful humor and
irreverent swagger," said Tom Rossmeissl, Head of Global Marketing at
Eat Just. "We want to capture real, often hectic modern breakfast
moments through a diverse lens that broadens perceptions and makes
everyone feel that no matter where they are on their dietary journey, if
they like really good eggs, they're with us."

Buzzworthy "Really Good Eggs" billboards will appear throughout the fall
in cities across America and in-store and curbside advertising will
reach shoppers at thousands of brick-and-mortar retail locations.
Additional activities include paid influencer campaigns on popular
social media platforms, search engine marketing, sponsored e-commerce
search, e-mail marketing and more. The campaign was developed in
partnership with New York City-based creative studio Mythology.

"Really Good Eggs" is confident, unapologetic and signals the progress
that the plant-based food industry has made in recent years by making
delicious, affordable products that appeal to a broad and growing
community of consumers. Eat Just aptly unveiled the campaign at
the [2021 Good Food
Conference](https://gfi.org/event/good-food-conference-2021/), the
world's most in-depth, cross-sector gathering focused on the power and
potential of alternative proteins to fundamentally change food and
agriculture.

Today\'s news comes as JUST Egg celebrates several key milestones. JUST
Egg products are now available in approximately 24,000 retail points of
distribution and more than 1,000 foodservice locations and the company
is nearing the plant-based equivalent of 200 million eggs sold. JUST Egg
is No. 1 in household spend and consumer loyalty among branded eggs and
is in 1.3 million U.S. households, up 45 percent since
January.[\[1\]](https://outlook.office.com/mail/sentitems/id/AQMkADI0OTIwZmJhLTg3YWYtNDgyZi1hYjk0LTNkYTg5ODdjM2VkZgBGAAAD4N%2BDpGTxy02kIcAFOmffBgcAD%2F6D9GbGt0%2BVN76PBzBzqwAAAgEJAAAAD%2F6D9GbGt0%2BVN76PBzBzqwABxG6NmgAAAA%3D%3D#x__ftn1) Recent
launches in South Africa and South Korea build on the brand's growing
international presence, which also includes Canada, Hong Kong, Singapore
and China. 

[Click
here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1qwKu0_BHOoojPUWrM-Lk9eYqBLLEY0s0?usp=sharing) for
more "Really Good Eggs" campaign assets.

**About Eat Just, Inc. **

Eat Just is a food technology company with a mission to build a
healthier, safer and more sustainable food system in our lifetimes. The
company\'s expertise, from functionalizing plant proteins to culturing
animal cells, is powered by a world-class team of scientists and chefs
spanning more than a dozen research disciplines. Eat Just created
America's fastest-growing egg brand, which is made entirely of plants,
and the world's first-to-market meat made from animal cells instead of
slaughtered livestock. The company has been recognized as one of Fast
Company's "Most Innovative Companies," Entrepreneur's "100 Brilliant
Companies," CNBC's "Disruptor 50" and a World Economic Forum Technology
Pioneer. JUST Egg has been named among Popular Science's "100 Greatest
Innovations" and Fast Company's "World Changing Ideas" and the
history-making debut of GOOD Meat was heralded as one of 2020\'s top
scientific breakthroughs by The Guardian, Vox and WIRED.

For more information on JUST Egg,
visit [https://ju.st](https://ju.st/).  

For more information on GOOD Meat,
visit [http://goodmeat.co](http://goodmeat.co/).
