---
title: Microalgae from volcanic hot springs as a promising protein source for
  the future
date: 2023-04-05 19:00:00
lastmod: 2023-04-05 19:00:00
slug: microalgae-volcanic-hot-springs-promising-protein-source-future
company: 7873
description: Researchers at Wageningen University in the Netherlands have
  successfully developed a method to produce a promising microalga species that
  could represent a resilient source of protein for the food and feed of the
  future.
excerpt: Researchers at Wageningen University in the Netherlands have
  successfully developed a method to produce a promising microalga species that
  could represent a resilient source of protein for the food and feed of the
  future.
proteins:
  - Algae
products:
  - Ingredients
topics:
  - Sci-Tech
regions:
  - Europe
flags:
  - Press Release
directory:
  - 7873
featured_image: 20210629_123620000_iOS 1.jpg
featured_image_caption: Production of *Galdieria sulphuraria* in a pilot tubular
  photobioreactor at AlgaePARC (Wageningen University and Research, The
  Netherlands)
additional_images:
  - src: FB.jpg
    caption: "Right side: Production of Galdieria sulphuraria in a pilot tubular
      photobioreactor at AlgaePARC (Wageningen University and Research, The
      Netherlands); Left side: hot springs"
    alt: "Right side: Production of Galdieria sulphuraria in a pilot tubular
      photobioreactor at AlgaePARC (Wageningen University and Research, The
      Netherlands); Left side: hot springs"
    title: "Right side: Production of Galdieria sulphuraria in a pilot tubular
      photobioreactor at AlgaePARC (Wageningen University and Research, The
      Netherlands); Left side: hot springs"
images:
  - 20210629_123620000_iOS 1.jpg
  - FB.jpg
draft: false
uuid: 11304
---
Wageningen, Netherlands, 5 April 2023 --- Researchers at Wageningen
University in the Netherlands have successfully developed a method to
produce a promising microalga species that grows in an unlikely
environment: the world's volcanic hot springs. Galdieria sulphuraria is
an extremophile microalga species with blue pigment that can live in
extreme conditions and could represent a resilient source of protein for
the food and feed of the future.

"*This is the first time the nutritional profile of this species has
been accurately quantified and understood*," says Pedro Moñino
Fernández, PhD student and lead researcher on the EU-funded ProFuture
project. "*We are now closer to real applications of this interesting
and unexploited microalga that could have a significant impact on how
the world feeds itself.*" The research results represent a key milestone
for ProFuture, a project that scales up microalgae production as a
sustainable, protein-rich food and feed ingredient.

As an extremophile species Galdieria sulphuraria can live in extreme
environments that are typically not conducive to life. Although the
species has been studied for decades due to its resilience and
adaptability, it had not been examined as a possible food source or
produced at scale yet. ProFuture studied a strain growing in the hot
springs in the Naples region of Italy, and found the following results:

**Nutritional profile: Great potential as an alternative protein
source**

G. sulphuraria biomass was found to have protein content in the range of
62-65%, which is relatively high compared to other algal and fungal
microorganisms with protein contents ranging from 30-70%. In addition,
G. sulphuraria proteins have a good amino acid profile, including all
essential amino acids. The proteins are especially rich in two amino
acids rarely found in such high levels in non-animal-based proteins:
cystine and methionine.

**A better source of blue pigment**

"*Microalgae offer some key advantages compared to other microorganisms
currently being studied as potential food sources. They are a natural
source of essential fatty acids, and species such as G. sulphuraria are
among the few naturally occurring sources of blue pigment,*" says Iago
Dominguez Teles, the project manager at Wageningen University.

G. sulphuraria contains a high concentration of a natural blue pigment
commonly used as a colorant in cosmetics and food. This pigment has also
been found to have antioxidant properties, as well as potential as a
therapeutic agent. Compared to extractions of the already commercially
produced microalgae strain Spirulina, the blue pigment extracted from G.
sulphuraria demonstrates greater stability, increasing its potential in
industrial applications. In addition, a mixotrophic production process
is able to increase concentration of the blue pigment.

**A scalable production model: Mixotrophic cultivation of microalgae**

The researchers developed an innovative production process
using [mixotrophy](https://www.pro-future.eu/news/industrial-mixotrophic-cultivation)---combining
both photosynthesis and sugar-based feedstock to stimulate the growth of
microalgae. To further validate the process beyond the bench scale, they
could successfully demonstrate pilot production in a 1300-liter (1.5
cubic meter) bioreactor at Wageningen University.

**Next steps on the way to use G. sulphuraria in our foods**

In order to effectively exploit the promising results of G. sulphuraria,
additional research is needed to assess its digestibility and to
identify any additional processing methods that may be required for
commercial applications. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) is
currently assessing the safety of Galdieria sulphuraria as a novel food
for the general population and as a food supplement for adults. In
addition, Blue Galdieria extract is assessed as a food additive.

**About ProFuture**

ProFuture is a four-year research project funded under the European
Union's Horizon 2020 program, spanning from 2019 to 2023. The project's
aim is to scale microalgae production and prepare the market for uptake
of microalgae proteins as ingredients for innovative and sustainable
food and feed products. Bringing together 31 partners across academia
and industry, ProFuture is coordinated by the Institute of Agrifood
Research and Technology (IRTA) in Spain. The final conference of
ProFuture will take place on 13th and 14th of September 2023 in
Brussels, including hybrid participation. More information will be
published on ProFuture channels soon.

**Further information**

-   Article [Galderia sulphuraria, the blue-pigmented
    microalgae](https://www.greatitalianfoodtrade.it/en/-innovation/galderia-sulphuraria-the-blue-pigmented-microalgae/) by
    ProFuture partner Dario Dongo and Andrea Adelmo Della Penna (Great
    Italian Food Trade), translated into several languages such as
    French, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish.

-   [Overview of results achieved so far in
    ProFuture](https://www.pro-future.eu/news/profuture-update-which-results-have-we-achieved-so-far)

-   [Project website](https://www.pro-future.eu/)

-   Hashtag #ProFutureEU
