---
title: "Cellular Agriculture Curriculum: Feeding Two Birds with One Scone"
date: 2021-11-03 08:55:15
lastmod: 2021-11-03 08:55:15
slug: cellular-agriculture-curriculum-feeding-two-birds-one-scone
description: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 runner-up. Molly Gordon is a PhD candidate in Cell Biology at Johns Hopkins University."
excerpt: "This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 runner-up. Molly Gordon is a PhD candidate in Cell Biology at Johns Hopkins University."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Culture]
regions: [International, US & Canada]
flags: [NA]
essay_contest: [Runner-up]
contributors: [9834]
images: ["mollyg.jpg"]
featured_image: "mollyg.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 9000
uuid: 9833
---
***This is a Student Essay Contest 2021 runner-up. Molly Gordon is a PhD
candidate in Cell Biology at Johns Hopkins University.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Coffee was demonized when it was first introduced in Europe in the
seventeenth century, gaining the nefarious moniker of "Satan's Drink"
(Pendergrast, 1999). The extreme reaction to this bean percolated to
some of the most scrutinous legislature to ever regulate a beverage.
This is hard to imagine with a Starbucks, Dunkin' Donuts, or niche
coffee shop peppering nearly every street in major cities. Despite its
bitter introduction, coffee has led to the creation of novel industries,
countless job opportunities, and dissemination of ideas as people gather
to converse over a cup of Joe. As outlined in his book, Innovation and
Its Enemies, Dr. Calestous Juma emphasizes that society tends to
initially resist innovations. From the use of margarine to the
development of highly sophisticated artificial intelligence, society
continually repeats this trend of opposition to eventual acceptance
followed by enthusiastic embrace (Juma, 2016). This concept is
imperative to understand now more than ever as we are currently
experiencing a period of hypergrowth in sustainable food technology
considering the reality that food production must increase over 70% by
2050 to meet the current rate of population growth. Regardless of how
fast technological advances can meet these demands, we need to overcome
the bottleneck associated consumer hesitancy for these future food
sources to reach their highest potential.

One of the most promising technical advances in sustainable food
security is cellular agriculture, producing animal-based products from
cultured animal cells independent of traditional factory farming.
According to the 2021 Life Cycle Assessment prepared by CE Delft, when
compared to chicken farming, which is the most efficiently farmed meat,
cellular agriculture has the potential to reduce the carbon footprint
and land use by 17% and 63%, respectively (Sinke & Odegard, 2021). The
field of cellular agriculture has grown exponentially since the early
2010s when the world witnessed the consumption of first cultivated
hamburger (Fountain, 2013). Since then, many of the challenges
associated with this technology have been identified and tremendous
strides have been made in the research and development sector of
cellular agriculture. For example, the exorbitant cost of growth medium
to feed the cells and allow growth at scale has been estimated to be
cost-competitive with meat production with relatively few achievable
alterations to several of the media components (Specht, 2020). However,
to reach the goal of a world fed mainly by sustainable alternative
protein sources such as cellular agriculture, it is pivotal to extend
equal efforts towards improving consumer perception prior to commercial
availability. One major reason for the drastic response to novel
technology is influence from incumbent industries, which is difficult to
mitigate due to the vast financial resources at their disposal. An
independent source of consumer hesitancy comes from an inherent lack of
knowledge surrounding the new technology, which can be directly targeted
by improvements in formal and informal educational outreach efforts
surrounding these innovations. Universities worldwide have untapped
potential to address this critical issue by establishing dedicated
courses and resources to propel the field of cellular agriculture
forward not only in the research and industry spheres but also in
consumer exposure and concomitantly their spread of opinions into the
general public.

The field of cellular biology is intimately linked with cellular
agriculture and as such this technology can and should be incorporated
into science curricula as early as possible to improve public perception
of this future food source. In the United States, only few select
universities, such as those that have extensive resources and are
well-connected, offer courses on alternative proteins sources such as
cellular agriculture. Furthermore, several of the currently available
courses are developed and lead by self-taught, highly motivated students
with scarce resources and as such can only scratch the surface of this
rapidly evolving field. Universities should focus their efforts on
immediately incorporating cellular agriculture curriculum into existing
majors with the eventual goal of establishing entirely new majors and
even new departments. Achieving this goal is mutually beneficial as
universities will also profit by becoming leaders in the field of
cellular agriculture and attracting many enthusiastic professors,
researchers, and students to their campuses to staff the new
departments. As such, any effort universities take toward introducing
cellular agriculture courses has the potential to positively impact the
academic ecosystem of the university.

The benefits of hands-on research-based courses dedicated to cellular
agriculture are multi-faceted, having impacts on students' academic
development, perception, and dissemination of knowledge as potential
consumers, as well as the expansion and evolution of research and
development sector of this industry. Official universities courses on
cellular agriculture benefit students' immediate academic development as
well as their long-term career prospectuses. Courses centered on
cellular agriculture are intimately linked to many disciplines like
traditional sciences courses such as cellular and molecular biology,
biochemistry and physics but also draws heavily on tangential fields
such as nutritional and environmental sciences, bioethics, economics,
and sociology to name a few. The multi-disciplinary aspect of this
technology opens the potential for inter-departmental collaborations
within universities, which can extend beyond the context of the
classroom into potential research collaborations. Courses should also
have complementary hands-on laboratory components, which would
exponentially increase the benefit to students as they gain experience
directly applicable to industry job positions such as basic skills
surrounding cell culture, scaffolding, and bioreactors. Industry
partners could guest lecture on these laboratory techniques, inciting
interest in cellular agriculture careers as well as creating direct
pipelines for networking for students who may become future employees.
Finally, cellular agriculture courses should implement non-traditional
assignments such as grant writing or business pitches as formal
evaluation tools which will not only function towards developing
students' writing and critical thinking skills but also propel the
industry forward with novel ideas and a steady flow of funding.

Superficially, students gain direct exposure to how cellular agriculture
technology works, which will spark curiosity and openness to trying new
products. It is expected that students will informally disseminate
information to friends and family, further inciting consumer curiosity.
Students are influential actors both within the academic ecosystem and
local communities extending beyond the university. As such, the benefits
of incorporating cellular agriculture at the undergraduate level will
extend beyond the college campus and has strong potential to influence
wider reaching consumer perception towards cellular agriculture. The
dissemination of information should also be formally incorporated into
the curriculum via at least two distinct mechanisms. First, students
could create and execute a community course on cellular agriculture in
public shared science spaces. Indeed, research supports that
peer-teaching positively impacts the opinion of course participants
related to controversial socioscientific topics (Chrispeels et al.,
2019). A second method for spreading information to a public audience
involves the use of social media platforms such as creating blogs posts
or podcasts on topics covered in college courses. Students could share
these pieces on social media platforms to stimulate thoughtful
conversations surrounding cellular agriculture among their peers,
friends, and family. Ideally, these public discussions would contribute
to counteracting the spread of misinformation online by drawing on
inoculation and "pre-bunking" theories, which posit that exposing people
to misinformation before it spreads virally through online media acts as
protection from future exposure to the false content (Lewandowsky &
Linden, 2021). Overall, cellular agriculture courses combined with
student-led outreach efforts will contribute to increased consumer
awareness via both direct and indirect pipelines.

The positive effects of incorporating cellular agriculture into
undergraduate curriculum will be felt immediately at the industry level
as well. Perhaps most importantly, the effort to educate students on
cellular agriculture and as a result influence their potential career
decisions means that the industry will have better control on increasing
the diversity entering the workforce within this industry. This is
especially true if courses are introduced in a nonexclusive manner among
different types of universities such as R1 universities, primarily
undergraduate institutions, community colleges, and historically black
colleges and universities. Additionally, industry partners gain unique
advertising opportunities among students by agreeing to assist in
courses where they can bring their products for live demonstrations.
Students and professors can also provide feedback for these companies
that can even be collected through formal evaluation tools and used to
improve their merchandise. Furthermore, partnering with universities has
the potential for financial benefits if industry personnel lead hands on
demonstrations or guest lecture within the courses. For example,
companies can leverage these efforts as evidence of broader impact
within the mission of their businesses, which has become increasingly
important while applying for external funding sources. Another financial
benefit includes a pipeline for becoming a permeant supplier of
laboratory equipment or even cellular agriculture products once they
become commercially available for these universities. As such, the
creation of courses on cellular agriculture will also positively impact
the state of the industry in a mutually beneficial relationship.

To ensure that the general population will enthusiastically embrace
cellular agriculture products both before and after they are made
publicly available worldwide, we need to focus on increasing exposure to
this topic from primary to post-secondary education. The vast influence
and untapped potential that universities hold in this sphere cannot be
ignored as these universities can collectively benefit students, improve
consumer perception, and elevate industry standards in the field of
cellular agriculture. As such, establishing robust, centralized
resources for cellular agriculture curricula kills two birds with one
stone (or the more animal friendly idiom, feeds two birds with one
scone) by propelling many different aspects of cellular agriculture
forward and directly contributing towards a realistic solution to the
impending food shortage. And hopefully, one day in the near future,
people will gather and continue to spread ideas for novel innovations
over a cup of coffee produced through cellular agriculture (VTT
News, 2021).

**References**

Chrispeels, H. E., Chapman, J. M., Gibson, C. L., & Muday, G. K. (2019).
Peer Teaching Increases Knowledge and Changes Perceptions about
Genetically Modified Crops in Non--Science Major Undergraduates.
CBE---*Life Sciences Education, 18*(2).

Fountain, H. (2013). *A Lab-Grown Burger Gets a Taste Test.* The New
York Times.
[https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/06/science/a-lab-grown-burger-gets-a-ta...](https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/06/science/a-lab-grown-burger-gets-a-taste-test.html)

Juma, C. (2016). Innovation and Its Enemies: Why People Resist New
Technologies. In *Economist* (Vol. 378, Issue 8460). Oxford
University Press.

Lewandowsky, S., & Linden, S. van der. (2021). Countering Misinformation
and Fake News Through Inoculation and Prebunking. *European Review of
Social Psychology*.

Pendergrast, M. (1999). *Uncommon Grounds: The History of Coffee and How
It Transformed Our World* (B. Books (Ed.)).

Sinke, P., & Odegard, I. (2021). *LCA of cultivated meat. Future
projections for different scenarios.* CE Delft.
[https://cedelft.eu/publications/rapport-lca-of-cultivated-meat-futurepr...](https://cedelft.eu/publications/rapport-lca-of-cultivated-meat-futureprojections-for-different-scenarios/)

Specht, L. (2020). *Cultivated meat: Cell culture medium costs*. The
Good Food Institute.
[https://gfi.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/clean-meat-production-volume...](https://gfi.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/clean-meat-production-volume-and-mediumcost.pdf)

VTT News. (2021). *Sustainable coffee grown in Finland*.
[https://www.vttresearch.com/en/newsand-ideas/sustainable-coffee-grown-f...](https://www.vttresearch.com/en/newsand-ideas/sustainable-coffee-grown-finland-land-drinks-most-coffee-capita-produces-itsfirst)
