---
title: "Because Animals Brings Cultured Meat to Pet Food Manufacturers Under New Name: BioCraft Pet Nutrition"
date: 2023-05-23 13:34:49
lastmod: 2023-05-23 13:34:49
slug: because-animals-brings-cultured-meat-pet-food-manufacturers-under-new-name-biocraft-pet
company: 5842
description: "Because Animals, the first biotech company to develop cultured meat for the pet food market, announced today it has rebranded the company as BioCraft Pet Nutrition as it shifts to working directly with pet food manufacturers interested in supply-chain stable, high-quality, sustainable, safe, humane cultured meat."
excerpt: "Because Animals, the first biotech company to develop cultured meat for the pet food market, announced today it has rebranded the company as BioCraft Pet Nutrition as it shifts to working directly with pet food manufacturers interested in supply-chain stable, high-quality, sustainable, safe, humane cultured meat."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat, Pet Food]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Europe, US & Canada]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [5842]
images: ["Team2.jpg","Scientists at hoods.jpg", "Food3.jpg"]
featured_image: "Team2.jpg"
additional_images:
  - src: "Scientists at hoods.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
  - src: "Food3.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 11320
---
***Expands tech prowess with Revo Foods cofounder and chief scientist
Dr. Theresa Rothenbücher ***

VIENNA, Austria -- May 23, 2023 -- Because Animals, the first biotech
company to develop cultured meat for the pet food market, announced
today it has rebranded the company as [BioCraft Pet
Nutrition](https://u7061146.ct.sendgrid.net/ls/click?upn=7-2Fu-2BFt8h-2F-2B8IbrV7wG96TO3cmrcgK2OkhgI1G9SLQvk-3Df3z8_tMV4yW93kyq5xPNHdnwLP1f9RG297xY9o1sswaOmKAl76jEnjDLFJzSm4Di45-2BxPkMNvYpWvniKFROx71PZWzGKu2xuPfIpAp-2BNzG8iQf76C-2FXbE0T63q8XyQ8dbgJOgsNtEXtbixfrYe1m2bWVd031PFiWbN2TAjr2wjLCBJ6C9WtK8898rExyUDczCIPpM00gYcj28VVKgq371mOeLNPP7OFnhp-2BBlBOyefAG05toExUW2XaJWOeqSyT3nWcStd-2FF3I0oIAnCQUxY-2Bg3vAN4Qu8GFqc0upbd1CXPBJWLm13hOzG54Iq4wGHTE6zJ8j708w-2FxNcKXf87mGa3T2SeSLoG5kfymGy0mZbozNfNWA-3D)
as it shifts to working directly with pet food manufacturers interested
in supply-chain stable, high-quality, sustainable, safe, humane cultured
meat.

The name change follows BioCraft's decision to dedicate its resources
solely to the commercialization of cultured meat including R&D,
infrastructure, and collaborative relationships. In late 2022, the
company discontinued its plant-based products marketed under the Because
Animals brand, divesting from those formulations and provisional
patents, while retaining all intellectual property relating to cultured
meat.

BioCraft is building partnerships with leading pet food manufacturers
interested in adding cultured meat to their product lines. BioCrafted
meat offers pet food companies a more uniform raw material that is
significantly less likely to carry any pathogens such as Salmonella, E.
coli, and other common fecal-borne bacteria that lead to costly recalls.

To accelerate product development, BioCraft has appointed Dr. Theresa
Rothenbücher its chief product officer. Rothenbücher is the cofounder
and former chief scientific officer of Revo Foods, an innovator in
high-precision 3D food-printing technology, and holds a doctorate in
molecular biology/tissue engineering and an MSc in molecular and applied
biotechnology. Her background in stem cell-based tissue engineering and
food technology innovation, and experience as an entrepreneur
introducing products to the European market, boosts BioCraft's technical
and commercial reach.

"As we intensified our focus on developing cultured meat for pet food
manufacturers, and built up our scientific efforts, it was appropriate
to claim a new identity that signals the state of the art in pet
nutrition," said BioCraft founder and CEO Dr. Shannon Falconer.
"Bringing in Theresa's experience in tissue engineering and product
development multiplies our strengths, and puts us on the path to
becoming the leading provider of cultured meat for the pet food supply
chain." 

Rothenbücher joins Dr. Chai Molina, chief computational officer, who has
led BioCraft's mathematical modeling and AI initiatives since joining
the company in 2022. Molina holds a PhD in Mathematics, and an MSc in
theoretical and mathematical biology. His doctoral work in mathematical
modeling of biological systems was recognized with a prestigious award
by the Canadian Applied and Industrial Mathematics Society, and he
subsequently worked as a postdoctoral scholar at Princeton University,
the University of Pennsylvania, and the Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis in Austria.

BioCraft's team also includes COO Jonny Cruz, a veteran of the pet food
industry with more than ten years of experience in sales, marketing,
operations, distribution, and supply chain systems. In addition to
working for large pet food brands, he cofounded and served as CEO of All
Things Pet, an industry sales and marketing consultancy representing 14
brands including multinationals.

BioCraft's meat contains no chemical and bacterial contaminants,
antibiotics, pentobarbital (a euthanizing drug), steroids, or other
hormones, and is not produced using genetic engineering/GMOs. BioCrafted
meats are nutritionally robust, with all required protein, key vitamins,
fats and amino acids such as taurine---a nutrient typically lost during
high-heat processing of meat slurry, then added back in synthetic form
for nutritionally complete pet foods.

BioCraft grows meat from proprietary cell lines in a controlled and
pathogen-free environment surrounded by a liquid medium of vitamins and
minerals formulated without fetal bovine serum (FBS), a process
ingredient inhumanely obtained from the slaughter of pregnant cows that
has been commonly used to produce other cell-based meats.

BioCraft's cultured meat is formulated with a similar consistency as the
"meat slurry" used in conventional pet food manufacturing, so it can be
used as a one-to-one replacement in wet or dry foods, treats, and fresh
pet foods.

Conventional meat production---for pets and people---has devastating
consequences, including climate change, animal cruelty and risks to
public health. Animals are fed diets laden with antibiotics, a primary
contributor to antibiotic resistance in humans and pets, and hormonal
steroids to accelerate their growth. The intensive confinement of
animals to slaughter for meat is contributing to air and water
pollution, deforestation, desertification and ocean dead zones, while
also promoting deadly outbreaks and zoonotic diseases. More than 25
percent of the environmental impact of animal agriculture is attributed
to feeding pets in the U.S. alone: if cats and dogs occupied their own
country, they would be the world's fifth largest meat-consuming nation.

**About BioCraft**\
BioCraft Pet Nutrition, founded in 2016, is the first and only biotech
company to create meat-based pet food that doesn't come at the expense
of slaughtering other animals. In 2021, BioCraft introduced the first
cultured meat product for the pet trade---cat treats made from mouse
cells---a milestone for the company and the entire industry. BioCraft
was also the first to create a proprietary growth medium as an
alternative to fetal bovine serum (FBS), helping reduce production costs
by well over an order of magnitude and representing a key step towards
commercial scale. Today, the BioCraft team includes a roster of PhD
scientists, a veterinarian, and serial entrepreneurs, all focused on
taking animals out of the supply chain by producing the healthiest, most
environmentally sustainable and supply-chain stable meat for dogs and
cats. BioCraft is located in both North America and Europe, with R&D
performed via its subsidiary company, BioCraft Pet Nutrition GmbH in
Austria. BioCraft investors include Draper Associates, SOSV, KEEN Growth
Capital, Orkla Food Ingredients, Sentient Investment, Hack Capital and
angel investors. BioCraft Pet Nutrition GmbH is a recipient of grant
funding from the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG). For more
information visit
[https://biocraftpet.com](https://u7061146.ct.sendgrid.net/ls/click?upn=7-2Fu-2BFt8h-2F-2B8IbrV7wG96THmRHQpXiZryQUPMHRFTs-2FU-3DgYy7_tMV4yW93kyq5xPNHdnwLP1f9RG297xY9o1sswaOmKAl76jEnjDLFJzSm4Di45-2BxPkMNvYpWvniKFROx71PZWzGKu2xuPfIpAp-2BNzG8iQf76C-2FXbE0T63q8XyQ8dbgJOgsNtEXtbixfrYe1m2bWVd031PFiWbN2TAjr2wjLCBJ6C9WtK8898rExyUDczCIPpM00gYcj28VVKgq371mOeLNPzUkqmrR09HuPAccTcWcow7dZB8C-2F2d6qFz2b1-2B7BZ11W0et00L45sgW7GSDAzB52G54sPn-2BVZSZocxVzL2b7C43-2Farxb0dx-2FhCehGHV3faIWuM04Jjy3anFVzcaILaJKotXyhJLo28tEomGVFg6nk-3D).
