---
title: "40 Alt-Protein Start-Ups Featured at New York’s Future Food-Tech Summit"
date: 2022-05-31 11:01:31
lastmod: 2022-05-31 11:01:31
slug: 40-alt-protein-start-ups-featured-new-yorks-future-food-tech-summit
company_name: "Future Food-Tech"
company_link: "https://www.futurefoodtechprotein.com/"
description: "Leading food technology event series, Future Food-Tech, today announced the 40 startups that will be participating in their Future Food-Tech Alternative Proteins summit taking place in New York on June 21-22."
excerpt: "Leading food technology event series, Future Food-Tech, today announced the 40 startups that will be participating in their Future Food-Tech Alternative Proteins summit taking place in New York on June 21-22."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Eggs, Seafood, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [694, 696, 1174, 1176, 1262, 1299, 1353, 5606, 5678, 5703, 5797, 5800, 5829, 5837, 5861, 5865, 6782, 6832, 7022, 7110, 7933, 8844, 9427, 10387, 10918]
images: ["JzFfLuLE_0.png"]
featured_image: "JzFfLuLE_0.png"
draft: false
uuid: 10938
---
**New York, May 31, 2022** --- Leading food technology event series,
Future Food-Tech, today announced the 40 startups that will be
participating in their [Future Food-Tech Alternative
Proteins](https://www.futurefoodtechprotein.com/) summit taking place in
New York on June 21-22. From emerging start-ups to moonshot companies,
the summit aims to bring attendees closer to the CEOs and Founders of
tomorrow's solutions through novel food tastings, small group roundtable
discussions, start-up pitching, a summit menu of new foods, the start-up
exhibition, and inspiring panel discussions.

Celebrating the abundance of innovators at the event, Callum
Alexander-Lindsay, the summit\'s Start-Up Partnerships Manager, said:
*"We are excited to showcase talent from around the world and spotlight
breakthrough technologies that can tackle the global challenges of food
insecurity, climate change and sustainable nutrition."*

**Early-Stage Start-Up Showcase:**

[Cella Farms](https://www.cellafarms.com/) uses breakthrough
technologies to transform agricultural crops into complete nutritional
products for consumers.

[New School Foods](https://www.newschoolfoods.co/) focuses on
whole-muscle seafood, made from plants.

[Pleese Foods](https://www.pleesefoods.com/) created a revolutionary
plant-based cheese developed by New Yorkers to melt perfectly on pizza
and comfort foods. Its cheese is made from all natural ingredients
including bean and potato proteins and crafted using traditional methods
without and dairy, soy, nuts, gluten or GMOs.

[Profuse Technology](https://profuse-tech.com/) develops supplements for
cultivated meat media that reduces the cost of producing the media by
40%, through increasing the produced meat mass and shortenings the
production time.

[SeaSpire](http://seaspire.in/) is developing fresh, whole-muscle
seafood alternatives with clean label plant and synthetic biology
biomass coupled with proprietary additive manufacturing technology

[Sudhin Biopharma](http://www.sudhinbio.com/) uses high intensity cell
culture and harvesting technologies via BioSettlers to achieve and
maintain high cell densities and viabilities.

[Synonym](https://www.synonym.bio/) has created a financing and
implementation platform to rapidly build commercial-scale
biomanufacturing facilities, allowing next generation animal proteins,
materials and energy to become a part of the global supply chain.

[Vertage](https://www.vertagefoods.com/) combines deep culinary
expertise with breakthrough ingredient technologies to create cultured
and fermented cheese that delivers excellent taste, superior nutrition,
and great value.

[Wanda Fish Technologies](https://wandafish.com/) has developed a
disruptive platform that produces delicious, nutritious cultivated
whole-cut fillets using native fish fat and muscle cells.

**Novel Food Experiences**

At the summit's Taste Lab, the founders of novel foods and technologies
will host small intimate sessions for delegates to try new products.
These include [Bee-io](https://bee-io.com/)'s cultivated honeys featured
in sweet treats, [Brevel](https://brevel.co.il/)'s novel
microalgae-based alternative proteins, [v2food](https://v2food.com/)'s
fennel and cranberry plant-based sausage rolls and
[Thimus](https://thimus.com/en/home/)'s new hardware and software
platform for quick evaluation of human response to food experiences.

Food-tech experiences extend throughout the summit menu as [Zero
Egg](https://zeroegg.com/) serves its plant-based egg for breakfast;
[PiP International](https://www.pip-lethbridge.com/) debuts its Ultimate
Pea Protein (UP.P™); [Meati Foods](https://meati.com/) serves Meati
Chicken shawarma pita and grilled za'atar Meati Steak and vegetable
kabobs; and [Nowadays](https://eatnowadays.com/) serves up wholesome
plant-based fried chicken made with just a handful of simple
ingredients.

Additional highlights and tasting experiences on the menu include:
[Eclipse Foods](https://www.eclipsefoods.com/)'s plant-based ice cream,
[Brave Robot](https://braverobot.co/) ice cream,
[ENOUGH](https://www.enough-food.com/) chicken, [Beyond
Meat](https://www.beyondmeat.com/en-GB/), [Triton Algae
Innovations](https://www.tritonai.com/)'s algae-based dumplings, [TNUVA
Alternative](https://www.tnuva.com/) plant-based drinks and cheese.

**Founders and CEOs Take to the Summit Stage**

To kickstart the summit, the inspirational CEOs of [Air
Protein](https://www.airprotein.com/), [NotCo](https://notco.com/us/),
[The EVERY Company](https://theeverycompany.com/) and [Nature's
Fynd](https://www.naturesfynd.com/) share their rapid growth and success
with the audience to pave the way for fruitful partnerships and open
dialogue across the three pillars of plant-based, fermentation and
cell-culturing technologies.

**PLANT-BASED**

A Breakfast Briefing at the summit hosted by Protein Industries Canada
invites delegates to learn about the collaborative food-tech ecosystem
in Canada with case studies from plant-based Presidents and Founders,
Jasmine Bryne ([Big Mountain Foods](https://bigmountainfoods.com/))
Chris Bryson ([New School Foods](https://www.newschoolfoods.co/)) and
Blair Bullus ([Wamame Foods](https://mywaygu.com/)).

Innovators will also discuss the role of plant-based in the evolving
alternative protein landscape as Michael Leonards ([Motif
FoodWorks](https://madewithmotif.com/)) delivers a keynote on
plant-based food science and design and Nick Hazell
([v2food](https://www.v2food.com/)) reveals what's holding plant-based
back from amazing taste and texture. Žiga Vraničar ([Narayan
Foods](https://www.narayanfood.com/)) challenges opinions in the
audience debate: 'Will Plant-Based Become Irrelevant?', before Aylon
Steinhart ([Eclipse Foods](https://www.eclipsefoods.com/)) and Miller
Tran ([Triton Algae Innovations](https://www.tritonai.com/)) weigh in on
what the future of protein will look like in 2050.

As consumer adoption of plant-based proteins grows, Yonatan Golan
([Brevel](https://brevel.co.il/)) and Chris Theal
([PhytoOrganix](https://phytoorganixfoods.com/)) take part in the panel
discussion around plant sourcing and its impact on carbon, nutrition and
biodiversity, and Taly Nechushtan ([Innovopro](https://innovopro.com/))
joins Ingredion on a fireside chat around the versatility of chickpeas.

*\"The next-gen of global consumers demand sustainable, clean label
products, and the market is searching for tastier, nutritious, and more
sustainable plant-based solutions to address this. In the coming years,
InnovoPro intends to significantly increase its growth to build a global
chickpea-based ingredient platform to inspire our wellness-focused
consumers,\"* reveals **Taly** **Nechushtan**, CEO, **InnovoPro**.

**FERMENTATION**

Julian Melchiorri ([Arborea](http://arborea.io/)), Laura Katz
([Helaina](https://www.myhelaina.com/home)) and David Brandes
([Planetary](https://www.planetarygroup.ch/)) will discuss how increased
capacity and reduced downstream costs enable fermentation scale-up to
meet demand.

Aviv Wolff ([Remilk](https://www.remilk.com/)) and Matt Gibson ([New
Culture](https://www.newculturefood.com/)) will share how they are using
precision fermentation to rethink the way we produce and formulate
animal-free dairy, meanwhile Gaston Paladini ([Moolec
Science](https://www.moolecscience.com/)) reveals its technology's
potential to improve all aspects of meat alternatives.

*\"Since precision fermentation yields ingredients that enable the
production of end-products that are identical in taste and texture,
healthy, and cost-effective, it will be a central player in facilitating
a consumer shift away from traditional animal-based foods,\"* says
**Aviv** **Wolff**, *Co-Founder & CEO,* **Remilk**.

**CELL CULTURED**

Lou Cooperhouse ([BlueNalu](https://www.bluenalu.com/)) and Guy
Michrowski ([ProFuse Technology](https://profuse-tech.com/)) will weigh
in on scaling cultured fish and meat through partnerships, as Nurit
Argov ([Wilk](https://wilkismilk.com/)) presents how cell cultured
breast milk has potential benefits for infant nutrition.

*"The Future Food-Tech Alternative Proteins Summit showcases companies,
products and opportunities, while inspiring collaborations and
partnerships, so that new age innovators and legacy corporations alike
can create meaningful impact through delicious products for consumers
worldwide,"* shares **Lou** **Cooperhouse**, Co-Founder, President &
CEO, **BlueNalu.**

**Hundreds of food-tech pioneers will meet at Future Food-Tech
Alternative Proteins in New York (and online) on June 21-22. The summit
brings together investors, food brands, retailers, ingredient
manufacturers and technology providers for two days of high impact
networking and knowledge exchange to accelerate technologies across the
alternative protein supply chain.**

**The full program, speaking faculty and delegate registration are
available now at**
[**www.futurefoodtechprotein.com**](http://www.futurefoodtechprotein.com)
