---
title: "Chitin: Providing Structure and Biofunction to Cell-Cultured Meat"
date: 2022-06-23 12:24:53
lastmod: 2022-06-23 12:24:53
slug: chitin-providing-structure-and-biofunction-cell-cultured-meat
description: "Chitin- and chitosan-based scaffolds show promise for improving both the scalability and nutritional value of cell-cultured meat products."
excerpt: "Chitin- and chitosan-based scaffolds show promise for improving both the scalability and nutritional value of cell-cultured meat products."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Fungi]
products: [Meat, Ingredients]
topics: [Sci-Tech]
regions: [International]
flags: [Featured]
contributors: [10872]
images: ["chitin-image_0.png"]
featured_image: "chitin-image_0.png"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 10937
---
***Chitin- and chitosan-based scaffolds show promise for improving both
the scalability and nutritional value of cell-cultured meats***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cell-cultured meat --- meat grown directly from animal cells rather than
harvested from slaughtered livestock --- although still in its
technological infancy, is attracting increasing attention in both
popular culture and the scientific community. Driven by sustainability
issues associated with conventional meat production, scientists are now
beginning to tackle some of the key obstacles to bringing such products
out of the lab and into commercial manufacturing facilities. That means
overcoming technical and engineering challenges related to cost, product
quality, and scalability. After all, no matter how sustainable such
foods are, consumers aren't likely to bite unless they're also cheap
enough, good enough, and widely available. But besides their potential
to solve some of the world's most pressing sustainability problems,
slaughter-free meats also offer another key advantage --- they can
actually be customized to provide improved nutritional and biological
functions unavailable in animal-based meats. Fortunately, in the effort
to address these challenges and opportunities, there remain some
unexploited materials and techniques that may be able to kill two birds
with one stone --- or as some industry advocates may prefer to say, feed
two birds with one seed.

One significant hurdle on the path toward achieving consumer acceptance
of cellular agriculture technologies and products is the difficulty in
producing whole cuts of meat and seafood, such as steaks and fillets. To
form these three-dimensional structures --- as opposed to unstructured
products like ground meat for burgers --- millions of cells must fuse
together in a process that requires both physical support and the
correct environmental stimuli. The latter include the numerous
conditions and factors inside the bioreactors where cell-cultured meats
are produced, such as temperature, pH, and the various nutrients that
cells need to grow. Physical support, meanwhile, refers to the
"scaffold" that cells like to attach to, which aids in their growth and
helps create the desired structure and texture for the final products.
In the body, or *in vivo*, this scaffold is provided by ligaments,
cartilage, bones, and connective tissues. Outside of the body, or *in
vitro*, as in the case of cell culture, it must be provided by
appropriate scaffold materials.

**What a scaffold needs to do**

In tissue engineering for medical applications, the biochemical and
physical properties of native tissues found in the body can be
replicated to form mature, functional tissues, such as skin, muscle, and
organs, outside of the body. Specifically, in the case of muscle tissue,
a diverse assortment of cells can be integrated in a co-culture system
(a system containing multiple cell types) on a three-dimensional
scaffold to generate muscle fibers, blood vessels, and a dense
extracellular matrix --- a network of cells surrounded by supporting
biomolecules, minerals, enzymes, and other proteins. This environment
[enables the
cells](https://journals.biologists.com/jcs/article/123/24/4195/31378/The-extracellular-matrix-at-a-glance)
to form higher structures through the connectivity of the extracellular
matrix, which anchors the cells and provides crucial biochemical cues
that dictate cellular differentiation and instigate
cellular proliferation.

The close relevance of these concepts and techniques to the needs of
cell-cultured meat production has made tissue engineering one of the
foundational disciplines of cellular agriculture. But despite the
similarities, growing meat for human consumption is also a very
different animal, so to speak. For instance, lab-grown tissues for
medical applications were never developed with mass production in mind.
On the contrary, they are often prepared on a small-scale, case-by-case
basis according to specific patient or research needs. Their scaffold
materials were also never intended to be eaten, provide a meat-like
structure, or be used in food applications. Scaffolds for cell-cultured
meats, on the other hand, need to meet these basic requirements --- they
must be inexpensive, edible, and amenable to functionalization.

Given these criteria, collagen and other animal-derived polymers are
often considered the gold standard for scaffold materials, where they
mimic their natural role during the growth of the animal. However, a
dependence on animal-derived ingredients would defeat one of the main
purposes of cellular agriculture --- replacing animals in the food
system with more sustainable technologies. This has led researchers to
[focus on
finding](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2019.00038/full)
animal-free scaffold materials for producing cell-cultured meat.

**What about chitin?**

One popular and emerging material in tissue engineering research is
chitin, a naturally occurring and abundant polymer found in the [cell
walls of fungi](https://www.nature.com/articles/srep11907) and the
exoskeletons of many insects and crustaceans. Chitin ticks several boxes
as a potential scaffold material for cell-cultured meat --- it's
functional, nontoxic, biodegradable, and inexpensive. Through certain
biological or chemical processes, chitin can also be converted into
chitosan, a water-soluble derivative with some important physical,
biological, and chemical differences. Chitosan, for instance, can be
[fine-tuned and
functionalized](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2019.00038/full)
to attain the desired properties for cellular scaffolds, such as the
ability to promote cellular adhesion and proliferation. A wealth of
research also already exists describing the use of chitosan in a diverse
array of biomedical applications. Because of their high
biocompatibility, chitosan-based materials have been employed in drug
delivery systems, wound healing, and scaffolds for tissue regeneration.

The successful track record of chitin and chitosan in [science and
medicine](https://www.mdpi.com/2310-2861/3/3/27) paves a path toward
their application in food technologies. For cellular agriculture,
specifically, chitosan scaffolds can be prepared in various forms to
promote muscle cell attachment and myogenesis --- the process through
which particular types of muscle cells attach to one another and the
surrounding environment to form larger segments of muscle tissue. This
functionality is essential for creating structured meat products that
accurately resemble their animal-based counterparts. Chitosan has also
been successfully blended with other polymers to further enhance its
[mechanical
properties](https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2015/821279/) and
better mimic native tissue, while recent research has even
[demonstrated](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b01261)
the ability of chitosan sponges to support muscle cell growth and
differentiation for cultured meat applications.

However, chitosan-based scaffolds are not without their drawbacks.
Although growing cells on biomaterials such as chitosan is possible,
their performance is often limited by a lack of the recognition motifs
(specific sequences of amino acids) needed to support cellular migration
--- the ability of cells to not only grow but also move around as needed
during the various stages of growth to form mature and healthy muscle
tissues. As such, additional strategies are needed, such as crosslinking
and genetic engineering, to functionalize these scaffolds specifically
for the production of cell-cultured meat. Nevertheless, these steps may
be a small price to pay considering the advantages such materials offer.

**Value as a food**

Chitosan has been approved as a food additive by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and [is
reported](https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/25/24/5961) to provide numerous
health benefits, including the promotion of beneficial bacterial growth
in the intestinal microbiome --- the collection of trillions of
microorganisms residing in the gastrointestinal tract. Such bacteria are
essential for the digestion of food, including the breakdown of complex
carbohydrates, and thus have the ability to influence metabolic
functions, which plays an important and increasingly recognized role in
overall health and nutrition. The human intestinal microbiome comprises
over 1,000 different species of bacteria that can be either helpful or
harmful to human health depending on their overall numbers and
relative proportions.

Although much remains unclear about which specific combinations of
microbes define a "healthy" microbiome, it's widely accepted that
dietary factors can alter this sensitive equilibrium, shifting the
balance of key microbe populations and potentially inducing or improving
certain disease states. Specifically, it is now known that the improper
colonization of certain harmful microbes can lead to the overproduction
of proinflammatory proteins called cytokines, resulting in chronic
gastrointestinal inflammation, which has been [linked to several
diseases](https://translational-medicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12967-017-1175-y)
such as irritable bowel syndrome, Crohn's disease, and diabetes. On the
other hand, dietary fiber intake [has been
shown](https://sfamjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1462-2920.13006)
to contribute to gastrointestinal health by providing substrates for the
growth of beneficial microbes, limiting the activity of harmful ones,
and increasing the diversity of fecal microbes, a common indicator of a
healthy gut microbiome.

Besides being excellent sources of fiber, chitin and chitosan have also
been found to specifically inhibit the growth of pathogenic
microorganisms such as *Salmonella* *typhimurium*, enteropathogenic
*Escherichia coli*, and *Vibrio cholerae,* while favoring the growth of
beneficial species such as *Bifidobacterium* and *Lactobacillus* ---
those often found in traditionally fermented foods. Because chitin
promotes the colonization of beneficial bacteria, it [has been
linked](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3586600/) to
improvements in gut barrier function and the reduction of
gastrointestinal inflammation.

In addition to their benefits for the intestinal microbiome, chitin and
its derivatives have also been associated with improvements in other
health disorders. A growing [body of
evidence](https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/25/24/5961) suggests that
chitin and chitosan can increase antioxidant activity by scavenging free
radicals, reduce cholesterol, and accelerate wound healing. Emerging
data further indicate that chitosan and its derivatives may exhibit
potent [neuroprotective
effects](https://www.mdpi.com/1660-3397/8/7/2117/htm) through the
suppression of amyloid-β formation, neuroinflammation, and neuronal cell
death, with potential applications in conditions such as
Alzheimer's disease.

**A new kind of meat**

The promising results obtained for chitin and its derivatives in tissue
engineering and other biomedical applications indicate a potentially
bright future for these materials in cellular agriculture as well. Their
animal-free nature, natural abundance, lack of toxicity, and ability to
promote cell growth and differentiation make them ideal candidates for
further research efforts in cell-cultured meat. But their numerous
benefits as health-promoting ingredients also demonstrate one of the
most exciting and underreported potential applications of cellular
agriculture technologies --- the possibility of creating entirely new
kinds of meat with unique nutritional and biological functions. Other
research in this vein has even
[demonstrated](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1096717620301208?via%3Dihub)
that bovine cells can be coaxed into producing β-carotene, a provitamin
typically found in plant foods such as carrots and tomatoes. As such,
cell-cultured meats grown on chitin- or chitosan-based scaffolds have
the potential to simultaneously accomplish two key objectives ---
solving one of the key challenges hindering the scalability of these
products, while improving their nutritional and health-promoting value.

*Catherine Lammert is a postdoctoral associate at Northwestern Feinberg
where she is studying neuro-immune interactions in Alzheimer's Disease,
and a summer associate at frontier biotech consulting firm [Helikon
Consulting](https://www.helikonconsulting.com/).*
