---
title: "UC Davis Sets Its Sights on the Main Course"
date: 2021-03-24 12:39:49
lastmod: 2021-03-24 12:39:49
slug: uc-davis-sets-its-sights-main-course
description: "How do you feed 10 billion people? The university that helped turn California’s wine industry from afterthought into economic juggernaut has set its sights on cultivated meat."
excerpt: "How do you feed 10 billion people? The university that helped turn California’s wine industry from afterthought into economic juggernaut has set its sights on cultivated meat."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Business, Sci-Tech]
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: [Featured]
directory: [694, 695, 697, 698, 5831, 7798]
contributors: [8110]
images: ["IMG_20200626_161412.jpg"]
featured_image: "IMG_20200626_161412.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "UC Davis PhD student Ted O’Neil working on cell media optimization for cultured meat in Professors David Block and Keith Baar’s lab. Photo credit: Ted O'Neil."
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 8623
---
*The school that helped turn California's wine industry from
afterthought into economic juggernaut has set its sights on
cultivated meat.*

How do you feed 10 billion people? It's a question that intrigued Dr.
David Block, professor and Marvin Sands department chair of the
viticulture and enology programs at the University of California Davis
(UC Davis). It's also a question that won't be hypothetical for much
longer. As Block explained in the school's recent public webinar,
"[Growing Real Beef Without the Moo](https://youtu.be/FYy26D5jg7Q)," in
order "to be able to feed 10 billion people simultaneously in 2050,
we'll need to produce as much \[food\] over the next 50 years, as we
have in the history of humanity up to this point."

One of the possible solutions researchers are working on is the
development of cultivated meat. If you aren't yet familiar with the
concept, don't fret; it seems the industry itself hasn't quite decided
which term---cultivated, cultured, cell-based, slaughter-free, or clean
meat---to land on. Whatever the name, though, the process to create it
is the same: scientists extract cells from animals and nourish those
cells in an optimal mix of growth media (more on this later) to the
point of what scientists call "differentiation" (they become muscle or
fat cells, for instance) until the end product can be harvested as meat.
Unlike recent alternative protein advancements that have led to products
like Beyond Meat or the Impossible Burger, cultivated meat *is* real
meat. But whether it can feed an exploding population better than its
conventionally produced counterpart is, like many other billion-dollar
ideas, largely a question of scalability.

UC Davis is now the first public institution to receive federal funds
for research that will attempt to answer that question. The Northern
California school was recently awarded a five-year grant by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) for up to \$3.55 million through its "Growing
Convergence Research" program. Not only does the grant represent the
first federal funds earmarked to aid in cultivated meat research, its
selection criteria actually had nothing to do with cellular agriculture,
as Block was careful to point out during his portion of the
presentation. Instead, the NSF invited researchers to propose solutions
to compelling social problems. And what could be more compelling---and
urgent---than trying to figure out how to feed 10 billion people.

Though cultivated meat was little more than speculation five years ago,
it's already become reality, albeit one with a caveat. To paraphrase
futurist and author, William Gibson, the future of meat is already
here---if unevenly distributed. While many labs have successfully
created cultivated meat, most private labs are engaged in a race to
market that precludes the sharing of processes and results; industry
insiders believe these independent labs may be doing research and
development that's the cultivated meat equivalent of reinventing
the wheel.

There's currently only one restaurant in the world---a tony,
members-only club in Singapore---that offers cell-based chicken on its
menu. But if cell-based meat does hold the answer to feeding billions
more people, it needs to be much more accessible. That's one of the
reasons many in the alt protein community (the term applied to the loose
collection of companies creating alternatives to traditionally
animal-based foods) are excited by the promise of the NSF grant. Not
only is its award a tacit endorsement of cultivated meat research, UC
Davis's work will represent a new open science approach to cultivated
meat, one where research findings will be publicly shared, instead of
siloed by the need for race-to-market secrecy.

{{< figure src="C2C12.jpg" alt="Representative C2C12 cells (a mouse myoblast cell line) stained for a muscle marker protein" caption="Representative C2C12 cells (a mouse myoblast cell line) stained for a muscle marker protein. Photo credit: Ted O'Neil." >}}

It was a presentation by a speaker from the Good Food Institute (GFI) at
a 2018 convention of food innovation and engineering that first piqued
Block's interest about the problems associated with meat production, as
well as the untapped possibility. Around the same time, two of Block's
PhD students, Ted O'Neil and Zach Cosenza, came to him with an interest
in working on cell-based meat media optimization, the life science
process for creating the most auspicious environment for
cellular growth.

Sensing an opportunity, Block's graduate students quickly secured two
grants with the cellular agriculture research institute New Harvest in
2019, and Block received a third grant from GFI in early 2020 to begin
research into alternatives to conventional meat production. At the end
of 2019, the school established the UC Davis Cultivated Meat Consortium,
a multi-disciplinary group of 30 researchers who were all interested in
the nascent field of cultivated meat. School researchers have been quick
to point out, however, that the university views cultivated meat as a
market supplement *to* and not a replacement *for* conventionally farmed
meat---an important distinction at a school with deep farming roots
where the student population is known as the "aggies."

As a land-grant institution that arguably put the California wine
industry on the map (partly by creating a school-to-industry talent
pipeline), UC Davis is uniquely positioned to deliver on the promise of
cell-based meat. As Block put it when explaining his areas of research,
cultivated meat "requires the deep integration of stem cell engineering,
tissue culture, animal and meat science, experimental process
optimization and artificial intelligence, biochemical engineering,
industrial fermentation and manufacturing, food science and engineering,
materials science and biomaterials, sensory science, techno-economic
modeling, life cycle analysis, and consumer science."

By taking a multidisciplinary approach to its research, UC Davis has the
potential to rally public resources for public good in a way that's not
before been applied to the science of cultivated meat---all while
integrating principles from the school's noted winemaking and biotech
programs to the new research.

{{< figure src="cMPC Diff.jpg" alt="Differentiated primary chicken muscle cells stained for a muscle marker protein" caption="Differentiated primary chicken muscle cells stained for a muscle marker protein. Photo credit: Ted O'Neil." >}}

Aside from the promise of what open research could mean to the
advancement of cultivated meat, the product may also benefit from a
surprisingly well-worn path to regulatory approval. As Eric Schulze,
vice president of product and regulation at cell-based meat startup
Memphis Meats and co-presenter alongside Dr. Block at the recent
presentation, noted, "The FDA and USDA are not doing anything new \[with
regard to future product regulation\]. They're using existing pathways
to regulate the safety of these products." So while the idea of
cultivated meat may require some consumer education to get potential
customers to see it as something other than "lab-grown meat" (a term the
industry abhors), the actual scientific processes at play are not
unknown to the federal regulators who'll be assessing its safety.

According to Dr. Denneal Jamison-McClung, Director of the UC Davis
Biotech Program and co-founder of the UC Davis Cultivated Meat
Consortium, "A lot of the technologies around cellular meat are things
that have been adapted from other biotech industries like industrial
enzymes or \[...\] tissue culture for biomedical purposes."

Those industries, however, tend to have much deeper pockets than their
food counterparts and product costs offset by insurers. So while we may
be inching closer to the day a few years from now when we can pick up a
pound of cultivated ground beef at the store, the price will need to be
within reach for the average consumer.

Before cultivated meat arrives in supermarkets though, its viability is
going to be tested, not just by regulators and consumer tastes but by
its own current limitations. The Davis team, for instance, has several
objectives they'll be expected to meet over the next five years of the
grant, including, "developing stable stem cell lines from which
cultivated meat can be grown; developing inexpensive, plant-based media
in which to grow the cells; and assessing the nutritional value,
stability and sensory qualities of cultivated meat products." Each of
these presents its own daunting use-case scenario challenges that will
need to be anticipated and overcome.

One of the most pressing issues surrounding cultivated meat research is
the industry's current reliance on the use of fetal bovine serum (FBS)
as the most commonly used supplement in the nutrient broth where cells
are cultured---a step in the development of cell lines that needs to
happen for an undifferentiated animal cell to ultimately grow and become
the tissue we recognize as meat. Currently, the extraction procedure is
not just prohibitively expensive, it's a byproduct of the slaughtering
process, meaning a calf still has to die in order for researchers to use
its fetal blood to create the FBS that's used to cultivate cells. The
FBS issue is something almost everyone in the cultivated meat industry
seems to be working on in order to create a scalable alternative to
its use.

{{< figure src="20200626_160432_1.jpg" alt="PhD student Ted O'Neil working on cell media optimization for cultured meat in Professors David Block and Keith Baar's la" caption="PhD student Ted O'Neil working on cell media optimization for cultured meat in Professors David Block and Keith Baar's lab. Photo credit: Ted O'Neil." >}}

As to the nutritional value and sensory qualities, the UC Davis team
seems to be taking a pragmatic and consumer-centric approach. As Dr.
Jamison-McClung put it when sharing some of the discussion among
researchers, the hope is that "startup companies in this space realize
that they are a food company, because a lot of time they talk like they
are a tech company, like traditional biotech. And to some extent that's
true but you really, ultimately, are a food company and if nobody wants
your food, they're not really going to stay in business."

And while UC Davis doesn't have to worry about staying in business, it's
evident that members of its academic consortium share an appreciation
for both the spotlight and the pressure the grant puts on their research
and its urgency. The hope is, though, that by becoming an academic nexus
for cultivated meat research and by sharing key findings, the whole
industry can move much faster---and we'll be that much closer to having
another option on the dinner table.
