---
title: "BioProcess Intern"
date: 2021-09-03 16:17:54
closing_date: 2021-11-01 12:00:00
lastmod: 2021-09-03 16:17:54
slug: bioprocess-intern-9617
company: 1299
description: "Clara Foods™ is a venture capital-backed company working towards a disruptive advance in food technology by producing animal proteins using fermentation --- without the animal. We join a new generation of entrepreneurs, activists and scientists who recognize that the decades-old factory farm model cannot sustain the dietary needs of 7 billion people and counting - and that technology may hold a solution."
excerpt: "Clara Foods™ is a venture capital-backed company working towards a disruptive advance in food technology by producing animal proteins using fermentation --- without the animal. We join a new generation of entrepreneurs, activists and scientists who recognize that the decades-old factory farm model cannot sustain the dietary needs of 7 billion people and counting - and that technology may hold a solution."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial]
products: [Eggs, Ingredients, Cell Culture Media, Technology & Equipment]
topics: []
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: []
job_type: [Internship]
remote: FALSE
work_environment: [Laboratory]
work_hours: [Part-Time]
career_category: [Research]
city: ""
country: "United States"
country_code: "US"
how_to_apply: 
application_link: "https://clarafoods.applytojob.com/apply/wpBKEZcUDl/BioProcess-Intern"
draft: false
uuid: 9617
---
Clara Foods™ is a venture capital-backed company working towards a
disruptive advance in food technology by producing animal proteins using
fermentation \-\-- without the animal. We join a new generation of
entrepreneurs, activists and scientists who recognize that the
decades-old factory farm model cannot sustain the dietary needs of 7
billion people and counting - and that technology may hold a solution.

Clara Foods is currently seeking a talented and innovative Intern to
join our R&D Manufacturing department located at our South San
Francisco, CA. As an Intern, you will have the opportunity to
participate in activities directly related to different aspects of
bioprocess development and industrialization and have exposure to
different technology platforms. You will have the unique opportunity to
work on commercializing transformative ingredients and change the
existing food system. As a member of a larger team dedicated to develop
a bioprocess for production of animal proteins by fermentation, you will
be assigned a project to improve the overall end to end productivity of
our lab scale process by doing the following roles and responsibilities.

We are building an amazing team of brilliant, collaborative and
mission-driven    individuals who take pride in using their diverse
skills to contribute to a better world. Our core values include
tenacity, curiosity, trust, teamwork, inclusivity and balance and we
strive to bring these values to life every day.

Join our team, own your destiny, and lead the world\'s transition to
animal-free protein.

Roles and responsibilities:

-   Collaborate with the scale up team in setting up and executing
    internal pilot scale fermentations every week.
-   Prepare media and reagents required for execution of upstream
    fermentations.
-   Be a key stakeholder in executing complementary scale down
    experiments to support the manufacturing team.
-   Learn, support, and execute downstream processing using various
    methods not limited to centrifugation, filtration (UF/DF),
    chromatography, flocculation, precipitation, etc.
-   Structure back end data processing and convert existing SQL data
    into visual results and derive conclusions.
-   Perform assays and support the bioprocess analytical team for quick
    turnaround of samples generated by the team (when needed)

Preferred Skills and Requirements

-   Pursuing or graduated with a Bachelor's or Master's degree in
    chemical engineering, biotechnology, microbiology, bioengineering,
    or any related field. 
-   Ability to work in the lab full time and lift 50lbs of weight when
    necessary.
-   Must have prior experience in the lab and have good aseptic
    technique to work in the biosafety cabinet.
-   Basic knowledge of SQL, R, Tableau to support data processing and
    analysis.
-   Must be a good communicator and be comfortable with handling
    simultaneous asks.
-   Must be authorized to work in the United States for Clara Foods

What Clara can offer:

-   Weekly catered lunches
-   Free parking, unlimited gym access, lounge, mini-golf patio, yoga,
    and fitness classes onsite
-   Unlimited supply of sparkling water, granola bars, snacks, local
    coffee, and tea
-   Themed happy hours and quarterly company outings
-   Monthly all-hands meetings and opportunity to directly speak with
    CEO and leadership team
-   Close to South San Francisco BART and Caltrain stations, including
    free shuttle service

Clara Foods is an Equal Opportunity Employer.  All qualified applicants
will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
religion, color, national origin, gender (including pregnancy,
childbirth, or related medical conditions), sexual orientation, gender
identity, gender expression, age, status as a protected veteran, status
as an individual with a disability, or other applicable legally
protected characteristics.


**How to apply**



