---
title: "New Plant-Based Brand Launches with a First-To-Market Beet Jerky"
date: 2022-11-07 15:49:03
lastmod: 2022-11-07 15:49:03
slug: new-plant-based-brand-launches-first-market-beet-jerky
company: 11179
description: "The brand soft-launched on August 17, 2022 with its premier product, a first-of-its-kind BEET Jerky, and has plans to roll out additional lines of vegetable-forward fare in 2023 and beyond."
excerpt: "The brand soft-launched on August 17, 2022 with its premier product, a first-of-its-kind BEET Jerky, and has plans to roll out additional lines of vegetable-forward fare in 2023 and beyond."
proteins: [Plant-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Business]
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: [Press Release, New Products]
directory: [6600, 11179]
images: ["BeetJerkyVariety.jpg"]
featured_image: "BeetJerkyVariety.jpg"
draft: false
uuid: 11181
---
*THEO's Plant-Based is Bringing Vegetables and Nutrition Back to The
Forefront of Plant-Based Foods *

**Chicago, IL** (November 7, 2022) - [THEO's
Plant-Based](https://theosplantbased.com/) has entered the \$7 billion
plant-based food space with a focus on honoring vegetables for what they
already are -- tasty, nutritious, and planet-friendly. By creating
Certified Organic, better-for-you plant-based meats that deliver on both
flavor and nutrition, THEO's is on a mission to lead the world into a
cleaner, more nutritious and sustainable food system where vegetables
are once again the leading ingredients in plant-based cooking. The brand
soft-launched on August 17, 2022 with its premier product, a
first-of-its-kind BEET Jerky, and has plans to roll out additional lines
of vegetable-forward fare in 2023 and beyond. 

With a commitment to helping people eat more vegetables through the
development of innovative, vegetable-forward products, THEO's is putting
plants back at the center of plant-based eating. While early innovators
have made significant strides in shifting the global narrative around
plant-based products, due to their focus on creating meat-mimicking
tastes and textures, there is still a gaping hole in the industry --
health and nutrition. THEO's envisions a future where organic,
regenerative vegetables are at the center of the plate -- and where
neither taste nor nutritional value are compromised. The vision of
Co-Founder Theo Mourad, who observed the need for a brand that delivers
the delicious vegetable experience he was used to creating as a cook in
one of the world's most respected farm-to-table restaurants, THEO's was
born.

"We are thrilled to officially bring our brand to market, beginning with
our delectable BEET Jerky," said Mourad. "Our goal is to actively change
the way people think about plant-based foods by showcasing vegetables to
be savory, delicious plant-based meats that are also clean and genuinely
healthy." 

"We are equally as passionate about supporting the environment," added
Co-Founder Aaron Brodkey. "THEO's stands for high-quality, real,
vegetable-forward, organic, and plant-based food, but we go beyond these
adjectives to always pursue better quality and sustainability in the
products we create. We support vegetable farmers who respect and
maintain the environment, and everything we do is rooted in
sustainability through our supply chain, manufacturing, packaging, and
more."

Childhood friends whose paths continued to cross into adulthood through
their shared passion for plant-based food, Mourad and Brodkey teamed up
to bring THEO's to life. Mourad brings 10 years of experience in the
food industry, having most recently worked in the kitchen of Blue Hill
at Stone Barns, the world-renowned two-starred Michelin restaurant in
New York's Hudson Valley. Throughout his tenure in the industry as a
cook, farmhand, volunteer, and student, he became fascinated in the
relationship between farming, cooking, and food. Brodkey, who holds a
degree in sustainable food systems, has worked in the plant-based food
space for nearly five years, most recently serving as Program Manager at
Big Idea Ventures, the most active alternative protein VC and
accelerator. 

THEO's products are masterfully developed with chef-driven techniques
that result in superior flavor and texture. At the core of each recipe
are Certified Organic, minimally processed, gluten-free, Paleo, vegan,
whole vegetable, and nutrient-rich ingredients. THEO's BEET Jerky is
crafted from organic beets and curated spice blends, which is available
in three flavors: Sea Salt & Cracked Pepper, Sesame-Ginger Teriyaki, and
Savory BBQ. 

BEET Jerky is currently available for pre-order online at
[www.theosplantbased.com](http://www.theosplantbased.com/) and will be
available in select specialty shops throughout the Midwest and Northeast
regions, including Whole Foods Market and Pop Up Grocer, in Q1 of 2023.
THEO's products will also be available to order on a number of top-tier
e-commerce retailers including Amazon in early 2023.

In Summer 2022, THEO's was selected by Whole Foods to participate in
their coveted accelerator program as the only Midwestern brand within
its cohort. The program offers mentorship directly from Whole Foods
experts, tailored education for small and emerging producers, the
potential for financial support to promote business growth, and
placement on the shelves of the brands' home city's Whole Foods Market
stores, with opportunities for regional and national expansion. 

In 2023, THEO's will bring to market more innovative, clean recipes
rooted in the brand's organic, vegetable-forward ethos. Upon launching,
the brand will participate in 1% for the Planet, a global organization
that accelerates smart environmental giving, and will donate at least 1%
of their annual sales to further healthy food access in Chicago.

For more information on THEO's Plant-Based, please visit
[www.theosplantbased.com](http://www.theosplantbased.com/) and follow
along \@theosplantbased on Instagram.

\###

**About THEO's Plant-Based**

[THEO's Plant-Based](https://theosplantbased.com/) is a new brand of
chef-crafted, vegetable-forward products that honor vegetables for what
they already are -- tasty, nutritious, and planet-friendly. Having
soft-launched in August 2022, THEO's is focused on elevating vegetables
and putting plant-powered nutrition back to the forefront of plant-based
products. By creating Certified Organic, better-for-you plant-based
meats that deliver on both flavor and nutrition, THEO's is on a mission
to lead the world into a more flavorful, healthy, sustainable, and just
food system. THEO's inaugural product is BEET Jerky, a
first-of-its-kind, savory snack set to shake up the coveted jerky
category with three delicious flavors: Sea Salt & Cracked Pepper,
Sesame-Ginger Teriyaki, and Savory BBQ.
