---
title: "GOOD Meat Breaks Ground on Largest Cultivated Meat Facility in Asia"
date: 2022-06-10 12:43:20
lastmod: 2022-06-10 12:43:20
slug: good-meat-breaks-ground-largest-cultivated-meat-facility-asia
company: 234
description: "GOOD Meat, the cultivated meat division of Eat Just, Inc., a company that applies cutting-edge science and technology on a mission to create healthier, more sustainable foods, broke ground today on the largest cultivated meat production center in Asia. The complex, scheduled to open in Q1 2023 at JTC Bedok Food City, will have the capacity to produce tens of thousands of pounds of meat from cells, without the need to slaughter a single animal."
excerpt: "GOOD Meat, the cultivated meat division of Eat Just, Inc., a company that applies cutting-edge science and technology on a mission to create healthier, more sustainable foods, broke ground today on the largest cultivated meat production center in Asia. The complex, scheduled to open in Q1 2023 at JTC Bedok Food City, will have the capacity to produce tens of thousands of pounds of meat from cells, without the need to slaughter a single animal."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Asia]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [234]
images: ["GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 1_0.jpg","GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 2.jpg", "GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 4.jpg", "GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 3.jpg"]
featured_image: "GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 1_0.jpg"
additional_images:
  - src: "GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 2.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
  - src: "GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 4.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
  - src: "GOOD Meat groundbreaking for press release 3.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 10991
---
*CEO heralds Singapore as vital for the future of animal protein * 

SINGAPORE (June 10, 2022) \-- [GOOD Meat](http://goodmeat.co/), the
cultivated meat division of Eat Just, Inc., a company that applies
cutting-edge science and technology on a mission to create healthier,
more sustainable foods, broke ground today on the largest cultivated
meat production center in Asia. The complex, scheduled to open in Q1
2023 at JTC Bedok Food City, will have the capacity to produce tens of
thousands of pounds of meat from cells, without the need to slaughter a
single animal. 

The buildout will house the single-largest bioreactor in the cultivated
meat industry to date. Local production will help GOOD Meat meet growing
consumer demand for its chicken products, which have been available for
purchase in Singapore [since December
2020](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20201215006155/en/Eat-Just-Follows-Regulatory-Approval-With-Historic-First-Ever-Sale-of-Cultured-Meat).
The facility will also be home to approximately 50 researchers,
scientists and engineers.

In remarks at the ceremony, Eat Just Co-Founder and CEO Josh Tetrick
said building the company's first meat production site in the region is
a major step for the industry. The company is also considering future
operations for expanded large-scale production, additional research and
development activities, and the export of GOOD Meat products across
Asia, subject to regulatory approval.

"Less than two years ago, Singapore made history, and since that moment,
consumers have enjoyed the world's first and only commercially available
slaughter-free meat at high-end restaurants, hawker stalls and in their
own homes," Tetrick said. "We view Singapore as vital in our plans to
build this new approach to making meat. We'll launch new products here,
distribute to other countries in Asia from here and learn from consumers
here who have proven themselves to be at the cutting edge of what's
next."

"As consumer trends and technology evolve, alternative proteins such as
plant-based, microbial and cultured meat could contribute meaningfully
to the '30 by 30' goal. SFA will continue to work closely with the
industry and research entitles to grow its capacity to produce a wide
variety of food, including our protein needs, locally," said Mr. Chan
Hian Lim, Deputy CEO (Corporate, Industry and Technology) of the
Singapore Food Agency, Singapore's regulatory authority entrusted with
ensuring a safe food supply. 

"We are excited to welcome GOOD Meat to JTC Bedok Food City, where
there's a growing ecosystem of food companies pursuing sustainable food
innovation and manufacturing. As an industrial developer, JTC sees the
importance of curating industry ecosystems in our estates to accelerate
business growth.  We are seeing a growing number of companies exploring
innovative food solutions and believe that GOOD Meat's presence will
help catalyze new partnerships and synergies in alternative protein and
other emerging innovative areas," added Alvin Tan, Assistant CEO of
JTC's Industry Cluster Group, the government agency charged with
championing sustainable industrial development in Singapore. 

"Eat Just's new facility will boost Singapore's ability to develop
critical scale-up processes in novel urban food solutions such as
cell-cultured meat and support our interest in food resilience. This
facility will also provide many good job opportunities for Singaporeans
to be at the cutting edge of novel food technologies. We look forward to
working closely with such like-minded companies to develop Singapore
into a hub where innovative agri-food solutions can be developed to feed
the world," said Mr. Damian Chan, Executive Vice President, Singapore
Economic Development Board.

At the groundbreaking, Singapore Minister for Sustainability and the
Environment Grace Fu also shared her excitement about how GOOD Meat's
new facility will enhance the vibrancy of Singapore's agri-food
ecosystem. [Click
here](https://storage-us-gcs.bfldr.com/q3h9z962v633vhbsvjng6w5/v/1045613109/original/Ministers%20speech%20for%20Good%20Meat%20Groundbreaking%20on%2010%20June.pdf?Expires=1654957271&KeyName=gcs-bfldr-prod&Signature=q_6VJCRTXmXtlLsy3eF_I47rnU0=) to
read her prepared remarks.

Today's event comes on the heels of GOOD Meat's [partnership
announcement with ABEC,
Inc.](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220525005345/en/GOOD-Meat-Partners-with-Industry-Leader-to-Build-the-World%25E2%2580%2599s-First-Large-Scale-Cultivated-Meat-Facility) to
design, manufacture, install and commission the largest known
bioreactors for avian and mammalian cell culture. Also in May, GOOD Meat
unveiled a [partnership with international nutrition leader
ADM](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220516006126/en/GOOD-Meat-ADM-Partner-to-Accelerate-Cultivated-Meat-Production) intended
to decrease key costs related to cultivated meat production.

For GOOD Meat images and more detailed information related to this
release, [click
here](https://brandfolder.com/s/gjm5v5pw6r95cxpqkfz64r3).

**About Eat Just, Inc.**

Eat Just is a food technology company with a mission to build a
healthier, safer and more sustainable food system in our lifetimes. The
company\'s expertise, from functionalizing plant proteins to culturing
animal cells, is powered by a world-class team of scientists and chefs
spanning more than a dozen research disciplines. Eat Just created
America's fastest-growing egg brand, which is made entirely of plants,
and the world's first-to-market meat made from animal cells instead of
slaughtered livestock. The company has been recognized as one of Fast
Company's \"Most Innovative Companies,\" Entrepreneur's \"100 Brilliant
Companies,\" CNBC's \"Disruptor 50\" and a World Economic Forum
Technology Pioneer. JUST Egg has been named among Popular Science's
\"100 Greatest Innovations\" and Fast Company's \"World Changing Ideas\"
and the history-making debut of GOOD Meat was heralded as one of 2020\'s
top scientific breakthroughs by The Guardian, Vox and WIRED.

For more information on JUST Egg,
visit [https://ju.st](https://cts.businesswire.com/ct/CT?id=smartlink&url=https://ju.st&esheet=52730291&newsitemid=20220525005345&lan=en-US&anchor=https://ju.st&index=2&md5=7d8740a902689f899f9890b5891ad2ac).

For more information on GOOD Meat,
visit [http://goodmeat.co](https://cts.businesswire.com/ct/CT?id=smartlink&url=http://goodmeat.co&esheet=52730291&newsitemid=20220525005345&lan=en-US&anchor=http://goodmeat.co&index=3&md5=8f0c9f677be9ef3d374e3d21c17e85fd).
