---
title: "The Buzzing Future of Food: An Introduction to Entomoculture"
date: 2020-08-06 13:48:13
lastmod: 2020-08-06 13:48:13
slug: buzzing-future-food-introduction-entomoculture
description: "Cultured insect meat products might look more like normal burgers and steaks than you’d expect. But what is entomoculture, why might we need it, how does it work, and who’s leading the research? Prodigious young science writer and New Harvest summer intern, Avery Parkinson, answers all your questions."
excerpt: "Cultured insect meat products might look more like normal burgers and steaks than you’d expect. But what is entomoculture, why might we need it, how does it work, and who’s leading the research? Prodigious young science writer and New Harvest summer intern, Avery Parkinson, answers all your questions."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Insect]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Sci-Tech]
regions: [International, US & Canada]
flags: [Featured, Explainer]
directory: [697]
contributors: [8107]
images: ["cricket-1038226_1280.jpg"]
featured_image: "cricket-1038226_1280.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 7421
---
-   Entomoculture is the branch of cellular agriculture concerned with
    growing insect tissue.
-   Culturing insect meat *in vitro* works by obtaining mesodermal stem
    cells, proliferating them in a culture medium, seeding them to a
    scaffold, and differentiating them in a bioreactor.
-   It is advantageous over mammalian cells in environmental tolerance,
    ability to grow in serum-free conditions, and ability to grow in
    suspension cultures.
-   Most research in this space is being done at New Harvest in
    conjunction with Tufts University.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You may have heard of cellular agriculture --- the science of growing
animal products without the animal*.* In recent years, it has emerged as
an interesting idea for producing alternative proteins.

The main motivation for this technology is that it has the potential to
decrease the negative effects of food production on the environment
(e.g., intensive resource use, emissions, antibiotics, animal cruelty,
etc.) while still allowing people to eat all the things they want
to eat.

If you live in a Western culture, this generally means things like beef,
pork, chicken, and some seafood.

But what about things outside of the Western meat bubble --- what about
insects? In many places in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, insects are
already familiar ingredients. Think Korean beondegi, Ugandan nsenene, or
Mexican escamole.

{{< figure src="Image 1.jpg" alt="Beondegi is a korean dish made of boiled silkworm pupae" caption="Beondegi is a korean dish made of boiled silkworm pupae. Source: [Orange Peel Moses](https://www.orangepeelmoses.com/blog/beondegi)." >}}

Insects, after all, have been shown to be much easier to culture than
mammalian cells, which is what has prompted scientists to seriously
consider entomoculture --- cellular agriculture specifically
for insects.

For many, this might stir up images of consuming whole crickets and the
likes of which, while common in many cultures, could be hard for some
to stomach.

But entomoculture is not about growing an entire cricket, for instance.
It's only really about growing the cricket meat --- not any of the
crunchy cartilage that makes up the majority of the insect. Just like
when we farm a cow, we don't plop the entire animal hide, bones and all
on a plate, but instead focus only on the parts we want to eat.

What's more, this meat can be grown and structured to look like a large
piece such as a steak, burger, pork loin, chicken leg, or any of the
other cuts of meat we are currently familiar with.

In other words, entomoculture products might not look anything like our
current conception of what it means to eat insects. In fact, they might
end up being almost exactly like popular animal-based meat products
eaten today.

**How Does Entomoculture Work?**

When we produce any kind of meat using cellular agriculture, we are said
to be culturing it *in vitro*. This is done in [four main
steps](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084952117305426?via%3Dihub).

Mesodermal cells with high expression of Twist and Sloppy-paired are
extracted from the animals. Mesodermal stem cells are cells which have
the potential to become any kind of specialized cell. Twist and
Sloppy-paired are proteins which are responsible for turning them into
muscle tissue. In the case of a primary culture, the cells are taken
directly from the animal. In the case of secondary cultures, cells might
be cryopreserved (frozen) from previous experiments.

Stem cells are immersed in a culture medium and proliferate. A culture
medium is a substance containing everything cells need to grow like
carbohydrates, fats, amino acids, salts, and vitamins. As these
molecules diffuse into the cells, they grow and eventually split into
two smaller cells. In this way, our population of stem cells, now a mix
of myoblasts and progenitors, increases exponentially,
or "proliferates."

Stem cells are seeded onto a scaffold. Structured meat products are
characterized not only by the kinds of cells present, but their overall
arrangement as well (think steak vs. ground beef). A scaffold is a mold
which the cells grow in and around to achieve this specific arrangement.

Scaffold is put into a bioreactor for differentiation. Bioreactors are
machines which expose the cells to a variety of different environmental
cues --- for instance, electrical stimulation and mechanical
contractions. This encourages the cells to differentiate into the types
of specialized cells we get in meat. These myoblasts then fuse to form
multi nucleated myofibers --- i.e., muscle tissue.

{{< figure src="Image 2.jpg" alt="Entomoculture works just like this, only with an insect rather than a cow" caption="Entomoculture works just like this, only with an insect rather than a cow. Source: [New Harvest](https://www.new-harvest.org/cell_ag_101)." >}}

How does this compare to mammalian cell cultures?

The specifics of each of these steps are best understood [in relation to
mammalian
cells](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2019.00024/full),
so let's take a look at those.

**Environmental Tolerance**

Overall, insect cells can withstand a much larger range of environmental
conditions than mammalian cells.

When mammalian cells are grown *in vivo* (in the body), they are exposed
to fairly hot conditions --- about 37 degrees Celsius. In order to mimic
these conditions, bioreactors have to be heated which requires more
energy and drives up production costs. Insect cells, on the other hand,
coming from non-warm-blooded creatures, can be grown to scale at
room temperature.

As mammalian cells digest and metabolize glucose, they produce lactic
acid and other byproducts. As they accumulate, they acidify the cell's
environment which leads to inferior growth conditions for the cell.
Unless the environment is rebalanced, the cells will not grow as well.
The rebalancing of the environment is usually done by replacing the
entire culture medium --- sometime as frequently as every 2--3 days.
Needless to say, this wastes nutrients and is expensive.

Insect cells are more tolerant to different pH levels. When insect cell
growth was compared at a pH of 5.5, 6.5 and 7.5, not much of a
difference was noted. What's more, insect cells partially circumvent the
production of lactate as they don't produce as much lactic acid to
begin with.

As a result, insect cultures can get away with full media replacements
as infrequently as each 90 days. Now, the other reason the media needs
to be changed is because of nutrient depletion. However, insect cells
don't deplete added nutrients as quickly as mammalian cells. The first
reason is because they consume triglycerides, glucose, and proteins at a
slower rate suggesting that they have more efficient metabolic pathways.
The other reason is that cell cultures are typically contaminated with
lipid cells called trophocytes or vitellophages which are precursors to
insect egg yolk cells. These cells are a natural source of fat which can
be consumed by the other insect cells.

Mammalian cells also require a relatively precise measure of carbon
dioxide and oxygen to grow --- as such, cultures are usually
supplemented with an extra 5% carbon dioxide. Insects can go without
this supplement.

**Serum vs. Serum-Free Culture Medium**

A culture medium is a substance containing all the essential nutrients
like carbohydrates, fats, proteins, salts, and vitamins which a cell
needs to grow.

As the culture medium diffuses into the cell, the cell will grow,
divide, and the cell line will proliferate.

Culture medium is an instrumental part of cellular agriculture and
generating cultured tissue because it's effectively what allows us to
take a relatively small sample of animal stem cells and end up with
enough to constitute an entire cut of meat. These stem cells would then
be put into a bioreactor where they are exposed to a whole bunch of
environmental cues which encourage them to differentiate into the
specialized kinds of cells we get in meat.

But in order to proliferate, a cell does not only require essential
nutrients and macromolecules. It also needs things called growth
factors. When mammalian cells grow *in vivo* , these growth factors are
supplied by the animal's blood.

In order to replicate this, the culture medium usually consists of a
basal mixture supplemented with extra growth factors. The basal medium
makes up the bulk of the culture and contains most of the nutrients
while the growth factors are added in trace amounts.

So now the question becomes, how do we get these growth factors? Since
they all exist in perfect proportions in an animal's blood stream, the
natural starting point is mixing some mammalian blood into the
medium --- specifically something called Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS).

FBS is enormously controversial because, as it sounds, it comes from the
blood of a dairy cow fetus. The two issues with this is that a) it is
reliant on animals, hence defeating one of the primary goals of many
cellular agriculture researchers, and b) it is expensive.

Additionally, from a scientific perspective, FBS is typically
undefined**,** meaning that its chemical composition varies from animal
to animal, which for research purposes isn't desirable.

There is currently no other substance we can easily obtain that can
single-handedly provide all these growth factors, so we turn to trying
to make them each individually using recombinant protein technologies.
But, at the moment, this too is expensive.

This naturally leads us to one of the biggest challenges for cellular
agriculture: finding the ideal culture medium that is simple, can
stimulate proliferation, is unreliant on animals, is accessible, and
is cheap.

Because mammalian cells rely on a complex array of growth factors,
finding a culture medium that satisfies all five of these criteria is an
ongoing challenge.

{{< figure src="Image 3-1.jpg" alt="Growth factors are often necessary for mammalian cell growth" caption="Growth factors are often necessary for mammalian cell growth. Source: [biosera](http://www.biosera.com)." >}}

Insect cells, on the other hand, come from insects which are
biologically simpler organisms than mammals. They contain a fluid called
*haemolymph* rather than blood and so do not rely on all the same growth
factors as mammalian cells.

This in large part allows us to get around the entire balancing act
presented by serum. Instead, insect cell medium typically uses a basal
medium (such as Eagle's Medium, Grace's Insect Medium, or Schneider's
Drosophila Medium) which is supplemented with plant-based additives.

Some examples of these plant based additives are things like

-   Yeastolate
-   Primatone RL
-   Hydrolysates
-   Pluronic Lipids
-   Peptides

Additionally, due to insect cells' limited reliance on growth factors in
the first place (animal derived or otherwise), mediums are typically
simpler in their chemical composition and are cheaper.

**Adherent vs. Suspension Cultures**

When mammalian muscle cells grow *in vivo*, a fundamental part of their
proliferation relies on their attachment to the e*xtracellular matrix*
(ECM). In order to replicate this relationship, mammalian cells are
usually cultured in *adherent monolayers *--- cultures where the cells
grow on something else in layers only one cell thick. This necessitates
using bioreactors with a lot of surface area which, when scaled up to
the industrial level, is infeasible.

The alternative would be using something called *microcarriers* ---
little bits of material that float around in the culture medium which
the cells can attach to, increasing the overall available surface area.
But this requires additional resources and more time to separate out
from the meat at the end, complicating the process.

This also introduces the need to *vascularize*. When mammalian cells are
grown in adherent cultures, the cells which are not in direct contact
with culture medium will stop growing because they can't access
nutrients. So, the culture medium has to somehow be routed through
the meat.

{{< figure src="Image 4.jpg" alt="Bioreactors are large machines which stimulate cell differentiation" caption="Bioreactors are large machines which stimulate cell differentiation. Source: [Bioprocess Online](https://www.bioprocessonline.com/doc/hyperforma-glass-bioreactors-0001)." >}}

Unlike mammalian cells, insect cells are also able to grow unattached to
anything --- or in *suspension cultures*. This means that bioreactors
don't need to have a large surface area, and can instead be designed
using much more practical shapes.

**Who's in the Field?**

In terms of insect protein alternatives in general, a few companies like
[Entomilk](https://gourmetgrubb.com/entomilk/) and
[Chirps](https://eatchirps.com/) are already working on using crickets
as a base for ice cream and protein powder, respectively.

But, at the moment, entomoculture is still mostly in the research phase.
In particular, at Tufts University, PhD candidate and New Harvest
research fellow Natalie Rubio is [working
on](https://www.new-harvest.org/current_research_projects) developing a
three-dimensional culture system for insect tissue biofabrication.

{{< figure src="Image 5-1.jpg" alt="Natalie Rubio, researcher at Tufts University" caption="Natalie Rubio, researcher at Tufts University. Source: [New Harvest](https://www.new-harvest.org/getting_to_know_natalie_rubio)." >}}

In order to do this, she is focusing on cell line development and
serum-free media formulation, scaffold fabrication from materials like
mushroom chitosan cellulose and silk protein, as well as nutrient and
texture analysis.
