---
title: "Building Political Will to Fund Academic Research in Cellular Agriculture"
date: 2023-05-16 13:00:00
lastmod: 2023-05-16 13:00:00
slug: building-political-will-fund-academic-research-cellular-agriculture
description: "By taking the tools of tissue engineering and adapting them to work on a scale as large as agriculture, cell-cultured meat could change the world. But first, we need political will to fund foundational academic research in this field."
excerpt: "By taking the tools of tissue engineering and adapting them to work on a scale as large as agriculture, cell-cultured meat could change the world. But first, we need political will to fund foundational academic research in this field."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Policy, Sci-Tech]
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: [Featured, Opinion]
contributors: [11312]
images: ["lead_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "lead_0.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 11313
---
***By taking the tools of tissue engineering and adapting them to work
on a scale as large as agriculture, cell-cultured meat could change the
world. But first, we need political will to fund foundational academic
research in this field.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In September 2022, U.S. President Joe Biden announced an initiative to
supercharge biomanufacturing in the United States and, excitingly,
cell-cultured meat was [directly
mentioned](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/press-briefings/2022/09/12/background-press-call-on-president-bidens-executive-order-to-launch-a-national-biotechnology-and-biomanufacturing-initiative/).
His [executive
order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2022/09/12/executive-order-on-advancing-biotechnology-and-biomanufacturing-innovation-for-a-sustainable-safe-and-secure-american-bioeconomy/)
tasked public bodies, including the Departments of Energy, Agriculture,
Defense, and Health and Human Services, among others, with submitting
detailed plans on how to advance the bioeconomy in their respective
sectors. The new initiative targets fields ranging from
biopharmaceuticals and cell-based therapies to agriculture and
food---including foods made from cultured animal cells. With many
specific policy and funding details remaining yet to be announced, to
date, [over \$2
billion](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/09/14/fact-sheet-the-united-states-announces-new-investments-and-resources-to-advance-president-bidens-national-biotechnology-and-biomanufacturing-initiative/)
has already been earmarked under the plan. While this is promising news
for many biotechnological sectors, it largely overlooks a key component
necessary for the development of cell-cultured meat technologies,
namely, the need for public academic funding.

Although advocates in the cellular agriculture space have made
[persuasive
arguments](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0962892422002331)
to increase academic support for the field, most of Biden's funding has
thus far been aimed at the private sector. To be clear, this is by no
means a negative development; cell-cultured meat products have already
been [launched
internationally](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20230117006210/en/GOOD-Meat-Receives-Approval-to-Commercialize-Serum-Free-Media)
and more are slated to begin appearing in [U.S.
markets](https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/fda-spurs-innovation-for-human-food-from-animal-cell-culture-technology-301680569.html).
A [recent report](https://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/cc4855en) from
the FAO and WHO shows a number of other countries are following suit and
beginning regulatory approval processes for cell-based food
technologies. In order for these products to ever become more than mere
novelties, significant investments in infrastructure---such as those
outlined under Biden's initiative---are absolutely needed.

But so far, cultured meat R&D has largely remained limited to a
competitive, quickest-route-to-market focus of the private sector. In
this context, technologies designed to address [problems of
scale](https://www.crbgroup.com/insights/food-beverage/cultured-meat)
primarily target the production of relatively simplistic unstructured
products, like ground meat, and
[semi-structured](https://time.com/6231339/lab-grown-steak-aleph-farms-taste/)
products that only partially recreate the fibrous texture of whole-cut
meats, like steaks and filets. This approach to R&D seems unlikely to
produce new understandings that will allow for the engineering of more
complex, multi-fascial structures that represent a large portion of the
demand for slaughtered animal meats and which will be necessary for the
technology to have the impact it promises.

**Bridging complementary fields**

While cellular agriculture and other emerging protein technologies would
fit squarely within political frameworks focused on environmental and
climate-tech development, so far there has been little traction to
financially support academic research in these fields. Aside from two
consortiums at [UC
Davis](https://biotech.ucdavis.edu/cultivated-meat-consortium-cmc) and
[Tufts University](https://cellularagriculture.tufts.edu/), there is
currently no large-scale academic infrastructure in the United States
dedicated to foundational cell-cultured meat research. To remedy this, I
believe emphasizing the overlap between cell-based meat engineering and
biomedical tissue engineering---specifically cell therapeutic
engineering---is needed in advocacy efforts for cellular agriculture.

Despite having distinct goals, cultured meat and cell therapeutic
engineering can be considered as sub-disciplines of the tissue
engineering field, rather than separate research spaces. As there are
already [wells of political
will](https://www.endocrine.org/advocacy/position-statements/biomedical-research-funding#:~:text=Formed%20in%201887%2C%20the%20NIH,medical%20research%20throughout%20the%20country.)
for funding cell-based therapies and other fields of biomedical
engineering, broadening recognition of cell-cultured meat as a
subdiscipline of tissue engineering could do wonders for encouraging
both public and nonprofit funding agencies, as well as scientific
talent, to opt into this space. And the advantages would not be
one-sided: this approach will facilitate mutually beneficial development
of foundational biology and engineering principles within the
often-overlooked intersections of these disciplines.

**Intersections are abundant**

For example, some of the key questions that must be answered in order to
produce cell-cultured meats with complex, multi-fascial structures
containing skeletal muscle, fat, bone, and marrow tissues are exactly
the same kinds of questions biomedical tissue engineers think about
daily: how to successfully [co-culture various cell
types](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4032528/) with
different metabolic and biochemical needs;
[biofabrication](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142961211009082)
strategies for the [assembly of complex
tissues](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014296121301483X);
and development of [massively parallel bioreactor
systems](https://humacyte.com/tech/) to produce tissues that require
dynamic inputs in a scalable way.

These may seem like gargantuan tasks, and in many ways, they are. But
they are also paramount to any tissue-engineered product becoming
practical to produce for consumers. Having a more thorough understanding
of the physiology of these skeletal muscle systems is imperative to
creating more complex tissue structures for cultured meat products and
will provide small victories that can be readily applied to cell
therapeutic strategies along the way.

Another focus common to both cell-based therapeutics and cell-cultured
meat research regards the media used to grow cells. Developing low-cost,
[FBS-free](https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016-021-00419-1) media
formulations is one of the top priorities and key constraints to
producing cell-cultured meats at scale and with competitive pricing.
However, this is just as important for [safely producing
therapeutics](https://www.sartorius.com/en/products/cell-culture-media/specialty-media/t-cell-immunotherapy-media?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=na_en_search_CCM_Immune-Cell-Media&gclid=CjwKCAiArY2fBhB9EiwAWqHK6mmcPTwsUIIoRWFgAwhnqZ1dC-nQATQU-2WFdvN_73Q7hVeIzdWIVRoCpoMQAvD_BwE)
that reintroduce a patient's immune cells (like [CAR-T cell
therapies](https://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/immunotherapy/car-t-cell1.html)
for certain cancers) back into their body without also introducing
animal-derived sera that could prompt an immune response. As these
therapies become more effective and widely used, having cheap but safe
media to grow these cells will equally help make them more affordable
and accessible to those who are un- or underinsured.

Other areas of interest common to both cell-based therapy engineers and
cellular agriculture researchers include [scaffolding
materials](https://www.proteinreport.org/chitin-providing-structure-and-biofunction-cell-cultured-meat)
and how [factors such as mechanical
load](https://humanperformancealliance.org/programs/) affect tissue
growth, development, and differentiation. The development of
[reprogrammed stem
cells](https://iscrm.uw.edu/what-is-cell-reprogramming/) has also been
an enabling factor of biomedical tissue engineering and is being applied
to [other species](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28942128/) to develop
[more predictive animal
models](https://medicine.yale.edu/lab/qyang/research/) of disease.
However, knowledge gained in this vein can also be applied to
cell-cultured meat research, and vice-versa.

**The path to better biotech**

Some critics [have
argued](https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016-022-00609-5) that
cellular agriculture technology will not address food security concerns
in low-resource settings and may actually contribute to food system
inequalities. However, such arguments fail to take a long view of the
field's potential if it receives proper academic funding.

Any potentially transformative new technology carries risks with regard
to how it is ultimately controlled, utilized, and distributed---and
cultured meat is no exception. As the field develops, it is critical to
continue discussions around [implementation
strategies](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2021.753996/full)
that are inclusive of all communities and stakeholders, especially in
dialogues with policy makers and consumers.

But it is also important to remember that cultured meat is still in its
technological infancy. Back in the early 2000s, when tissue engineering
was only just becoming recognized as a field in its own right, similar
arguments could have been made about such technologies being exclusive
and exacerbating inequalities in access to certain therapies. But now,
for instance, we see engineered blood vessels being used to [treat
trauma
injuries](https://fmcna.com/insights/articles/humacyte-sends-human-acellular-vessels-ukraine/)
within a war setting in Ukraine.

Because of the distinct foci, incentives, and risk tolerances of
academic vs. industrial research, each sector is poised to fill
complementary roles in the pipeline from discovery to the deployment of
any biotech innovation. This article suggests that large-scale public
and nonprofit funding must be invested in foundational academic research
on the tissue engineering of meat---specifically in subjects that are
not currently targeted under private-sector R&D funding models.

The open and public nature of such findings will also allow for
innovations to be shared and applied more broadly than those that are
kept secret or monopolized behind intellectual property protections.
Such collaborative information sharing is especially vital in a
fledgling field with so many daunting and unanswered questions essential
to laying a strong foundation for its long-term feasibility.

The question, therefore, goes back to the beginning of this essay: how
to incentivize and build political will to fund such research?

**Lighting the way forward**

For decades, tissue engineering has belonged exclusively to the field of
biomedical science. Now, new applications are showing these technologies
may have significant potential to positively impact the food and
agricultural sectors as well. But compared to medical science, food is
far more prone to cultural, social, and political sensitivities that can
constrain evidence-based policy making and the allocation of funds where
they may be most effective. Rather than rallying behind a movement that
contributes to such issues, advocates and researchers in cellular
agriculture may find a neutral framing of their work more effective.

In particular, highlighting the complementary nature of cell-cultured
meat research with cell-based therapeutics and foundational tissue
engineering could help create stronger political will to fund academic
study in this field. While foundational scientific research can demand
long-term thinking, it can also result in valuable near-term gains based
upon discoveries made along the way. Research conducted for NASA's space
exploration program, for example, has resulted in [thousands of
advances](https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/space-exploration-and-us-competitiveness)
in medical science, industrial techniques, and household goods when they
were applied to other sectors.

Cell-cultured meat does not just hold the promise to radically improve
how we produce food and interface with our environment. By taking the
tools and techniques of tissue engineering and adapting them to work on
a scale as large as agriculture, it also has the potential to change the
world in ways we cannot yet imagine.
