---
title: "21 Innovators Advancing Alternative Proteins"
date: 2021-05-28 11:57:30
lastmod: 2021-05-28 11:57:30
slug: 21-innovators-advancing-alternative-proteins
company_name: "Future Food-Tech"
company_link: "https://www.futurefoodtechprotein.com"
description: "At Future Food-Tech Alternative Proteins on June 22-23, the summit will spotlight twenty one game-changing solutions in the summit’s Start-Up Arena, Innovation Challenge Finale with Quorn Foods and Roquette, Start-Up TechHub, Fireside Chats and Step-Up to the Plate cooking demonstrations."
excerpt: "At Future Food-Tech Alternative Proteins on June 22-23, the summit will spotlight twenty one game-changing solutions in the summit’s Start-Up Arena, Innovation Challenge Finale with Quorn Foods and Roquette, Start-Up TechHub, Fireside Chats and Step-Up to the Plate cooking demonstrations."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Seafood, Pet Food, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [International]
flags: [Press Release]
directory: [1298, 5703, 5791, 5842, 5893, 5948, 6861, 6916, 7119, 8802]
images: ["FFTP21 -  Meet The Start-Ups Headshots_0.jpg","FFTP21 - Meet the Start-Ups_0.png"]
featured_image: "FFTP21 -  Meet The Start-Ups Headshots_0.jpg"
additional_images:
  - src: "FFTP21 - Meet the Start-Ups_0.png"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 9030
---
**The growing appetite for sustainable proteins is fueling demand for
new product choices, driving innovators to unlock new scalable
solutions. Disruptive technologies from emerging start-ups are critical
to building the future of protein.**

At Future Food-Tech Alternative Proteins on June 22-23, the summit will
spotlight twenty one game-changing solutions in the summit's Start-Up
Arena, Innovation Challenge Finale with Quorn Foods and Roquette,
Start-Up TechHub, Fireside Chats and Step-Up to the Plate cooking
demonstrations.

The organizers have scoured the globe to find trailblazers in
alternative proteins, across fermentation, cell-based and plant-based
solutions, and will spotlight emerging technology pioneers from South
Africa, USA, Canada, China, Chile, Japan, France, the Netherlands,
Sweden and the UK. 

*"We're delighted to showcase the most exciting emerging talent and
fresh solutions within the alternative protein space and can't wait to
welcome our international start-ups to the summit," says* Jet Luckhurst,
Start-Up Partnerships Manager at Future Food-Tech.

**Meet the exciting crop of globe-spanning alternative protein talent:**

**Fermentation - Seafood**

"**Aqua Cultured Foods** (USA) has created the first whole-cut seafood
alternative using fermentation. What makes this so exciting is that our
proprietary strain of fungi is grown and not processed. Allowing it to
have superior nutrition to other plant-based alternatives while
maintaining the familiar texture of traditional seafood," explains Anne
Palermo, Founder and CEO.

**Fermentation - Dairy**

\"Sustainably produced cheese that also has the flavor, texture and
appeal of traditional cheese has been unachievable until now. **Better
Dairy** (UK) is leveraging precision fermentation to bring high quality
animal-free cheese to life whilst building out a rolodex of
computational tools enabling them to pave a clearer path towards
price-parity with traditional options," says Jevan Nagarajah, CEO.

\"So far, plant-based cheese hasn\'t captured any meaningful market
share, because existing products haven\'t met consumer expectations in
terms of price, taste, and nutrition. **Stockeld Dreamery** (Sweden) is
creating the world\'s most ambitious cheese, which is why we\'re
building the world\'s largest R&D team for plant-based cheese, and a
brand that people care about,\" shares Sorosh Tavakoli, CEO and
Co-Founder.

**Fermentation -- Ingredients**

"**FUMI Ingredients** (the Netherlands) develops animal-free food
ingredients from natural micro-organisms. We believe that microorganisms
are an untapped source of high-value functional ingredients, which can
be used to make new textures in healthy and sustainable food products,"
explains Corjan van den Berg, CEO and Co-Founder.

"**Noblegen** (Canada) makes nutritious food with the lowest ecological
footprint for a world that desperately needs to revamp the way it grows,
manufacturers and thinks about food. We do this with our breakthrough,
proprietary technology that enables us to efficiently cultivate an
overlooked food source called Euglena," details Hugh Williams, VP of
Commercial and Corporate Strategy.

**Fermentation - Meat**

"Plant-based meat alternatives are great solutions to replace animal
meat consumption, but the hydrocolloid-based additives that are used in
these products are not great. At **Fybraworks** (USA) we are working
hard to replace these additives with fermentation-based meat proteins.
This will result in a cleaner labelled product with nutrition and taste
that closely matches the animal meat. Fybraworks: real meat taste, real
world solutions," shares Chenfeng Lu, Founder and CEO.

**Cell Based -- Collagen/Gelatin**

\"Currently, there are companies on similar missions to produce
animal-free collagen, but their process involves fermentation technology
which only produces collagen peptides (part of the protein). What makes
**JellaTech**'s (the Netherlands) technology revolutionary is that we
are able to produce native collagen using animal cells in a sustainable
way, which allows our collagen to have its full functionality**,\"**
details Stephanie Michelsen, Co-Founder and CEO.

**Cell Based - Meat**

"We're **Mzansi Meat Co.** (South Africa) and we make meat in Africa,
the first company to bring cellular agriculture to the continent. Our
team of scientists will be working together with local nguni and
indigenous cattle farmers to grow their output and make meat that is
healthy and accessible. We aim to be part of the solution in securing
food in South Africa and the continent," outlines Brett Thompson,
Co-Founder and CEO.

**Cell Based - Pet Food**

"**Because, Animals** (USA) is creating the most sustainable, humane,
and nutritious pet food on the planet. By growing small-prey species of
cultured meat -- without the inclusion of antibiotics or
growth-promoting steroids! Because, Animals is creating safer pet foods
made with meat that pets in the wild would naturally eat," shares
Shannon Falconer, CEO and Co-Founder.

**Cell Based - Substrates**

"**Van Heron Labs** (USA) is disrupting alternative protein through one
central focus: optimizing cellular health. Using an innovative
bioinformatics pipeline and multi-omics data, the VHL platform analyzes
and streamlines metabolism to produce superior growth and performance
for any cell type, reducing costs and dependence on animal products,"
explains Rebecca Vaught, Founder and President.

**Cell Based - Baby Formula**

"**Harmony** (USA) is a food science-based company applying cutting-edge
biotechnology to mimic the composition of human breast milk and create
the next generation of infant formulas. Nowadays we have over 22
millions of formula allergic babies/year worldwide. Harmony produces
breast milk protein-based formulas which are animal-free, allergy-free
and environmentally friendly," notes Del Afonso, CEO.

**Plant Based - Meat**

"Until now, there were only two options: dry extrusion to create minced
products such as steaks or sausages, and wet extrusion to create small
chicken-like pieces. However, no technology allowed to create thick
fibrous whole cuts of meat. This is now possible with **Umiami**'s
(France) unique texturization platform that allows creating thick
fibrous whole-cuts in which we master both the direction and the
thickness of fibers. And it is cleaner-label, too!" states Martin
Habfast, Head of Partnerships.

\"Global and Chinese consumers are more and more interested in eating
healthier, and **Zrou, by YouKuai Group** (China) has created one of the
most (if not the most) clean-labeled plant-based meat product currently
in the market, and we will stick to the clean label principle in future
product development,\" notes Franklin Yao, CEO and Co-Founder.

"**Next Meats** (Japan) is thrilled to present the world\'s first
plant-based Yakiniku barbecue meat, the NEXT Yakiniku! Japan has a rich
history of plant-based cuisine, but we're underrepresented in the global
alt-meat space. Using our authentic Japanese flavors and unique
production know-how to simulate realistic, meat-like textures, we hope
to bring our culinary expertise to the forefront of this emerging
market," explains Saaya Matsukubo, CMO.

"At **Planted** (Switzerland) we turn very few and natural ingredients
into delicious meats from plants. Operating our own production and
research facilities, we're passionate and ambitious to create the
tastiest innovations at speed and scale," details Lukas Böni,
Co-Founder.

**Plant Based -- Dairy and Meat**

"**NotCo** (Chile) is the only global company that has generated a
paradigm shift in the mass consumption food industry, simultaneously
breaking into plant-based products in categories such as dairy, eggs and
meat. Our application solves a current problem in an innovative way,
bringing plant-based products closer to animal-based products in terms
of the whole consumer experience,\" shares Sofia Yasky, Food Science &
Technology Team Leader.

**Plant Based - Seafood**

**Kuleana** (USA) is currently patenting biotechnology approaches for
creating unprocessed formats of meat. It is based on enzymatic processes
that replicate the appearance and nutritional profile of raw unprocessed
fish. Our technology is cost-effective and GRAS so we've a faster route
to market compared to most processes using recombinant proteins or
cell-based technology," details Jacek Prus, Founder and CEO.

**Plant Based - Ingredients**

\"The demand for alternative proteins has never been higher, but the
market relies primarily on soybeans and yellow peas. Brands have had to
rely on what is commercially scaled instead of what is best in terms of
taste, texture, or sustainability. The next era of alternative proteins
needs new performance options for brands. Processing innovations have
opened up those options,\" says Michael Todd, CEO at **Nutriati** (USA).

"**P&M** (Chile) food matrixes combine ingredients that create mixes
with full and balance nutritional profile and good taste since our
technology lets us mask vegetal origin ingredients' flavors that may not
be appealing or present textures that are not attractive to some
consumers. We use vegetal ingredients that pose a demonstrated positive
effect on human health without sacrificing the great experience of
eating," explains Manuel Palma Astudillo, CEO and Co-Founder.

**Plant Based - Drinks**

"At **GROUNDED** (UK), we've made a totally natural protein shake,
entirely from plants + with absolutely no rubbish in it. Our packaging
is also made from plants. In a category riddled with synthetic
ingredients, our shakes stand out as the cleanest available protein
shakes on the market," shares Gabriel Bean, Founder.

**Plant Based - Prebiotic Yoghurts**

\"**Dahlicious** (USA) leverages a centuries-old tradition of
"slow-culturing," meaning our yogurts are cooked at a lower temperature
for a longer period, creating the most luxurious creamy texture and a
high level of probiotics.  This technique is leveraged across both our
dairy and plant-based lines, including almond, coconut, and oat," shares
Pamela Goldberg, CEO.

Over 150 game-changing early and mid-stage companies will join the
900-strong virtual audience at the Future Food-Tech Alternative Proteins
summit on June 22-23. The summit will bring together food brands,
retailers, ingredient manufacturers, technology providers and investors
for two days of high impact online networking and knowledge-exchange to
map out and accelerate the future of protein.

The full program, speaking faculty and delegate registration are
available now at
[www.futurefoodtechprotein.com](http://www.futurefoodtechprotein.com)

**Note to Editors:**\
Hosted by Rethink Events, Future Food-Tech summits take place three
times a year in San Francisco, New York and London, plus also in
Singapore as part of the Asia-Pacific Agri-Food Innovation Summit. At
present the summits are being held virtually to connect our global
audiences. The summits generate valuable opportunities for networking,
knowledge exchange and deal-making among Future Food-Tech's
international network of food businesses, retailers, technology
providers, entrepreneurs and investors. <https://futurefoodtech.com/>
