---
title: "GeneusBiotech Awarded with Grant for Furoid"
date: 2022-04-15 08:41:30
lastmod: 2022-04-15 08:41:30
slug: geneusbiotech-awarded-grant-furoid
company: 10726
description: "GENEUSBIOTECH has been awarded a grant from the European Commission in the Pathfinder Challenge for its Furoid technology. The Commission sees great potential in the innovative process and has allocated more than EUR 4 million to further develop the promising technology."
excerpt: "GENEUSBIOTECH has been awarded a grant from the European Commission in the Pathfinder Challenge for its Furoid technology. The Commission sees great potential in the innovative process and has allocated more than EUR 4 million to further develop the promising technology."
proteins: [Cell-Based]
products: [Materials]
topics: [Business, Sci-Tech]
regions: [Europe]
flags: [Press Release, Investments]
directory: [10726]
images: ["geneus_0.png","IMG_3287.jpg", "image_6483441.JPG", "Geneusbiotech Raw Data-Images of Hair-Confocal imaging of hair follicle-IVH hair D33 K75 DAPI_Render_Series3.jpg", "IMG_9093.jpg", "BTH55_20171121_WT-iPSC-007-4dEB-3dafterTrans_3chir_0.5nMBMP4_1.JPEG", "IMG_5508.JPG", "IMG_4285.JPG", "IMG_4296.JPG", "_MVA6168 13.27_0.JPG"]
featured_image: "geneus_0.png"
additional_images:
  - src: "IMG_3287.jpg"
    caption: "MARIYA ZAKURNAEVA-KUNZ , CEO FUROID™️ and Aristotle FUROID™️ CeO (with minor e) aka. Chief entertainment Officer- both wearing fur in 2016"
    alt: "MARIYA ZAKURNAEVA-KUNZ , CEO FUROID™️ and Aristotle FUROID™️ CeO (with minor e) aka. Chief entertainment Officer- both wearing fur in 2016"
    title: "MARIYA ZAKURNAEVA-KUNZ , CEO FUROID™️ and Aristotle FUROID™️ CeO (with minor e) aka. Chief entertainment Officer- both wearing fur in 2016"
  - src: "image_6483441.JPG"
    caption: "FUROID™️ first - patented - fully invitro engineered hair follicles in March 2018"
    alt: "FUROID™️ first - patented - fully invitro engineered hair follicles in March 2018"
    title: "FUROID™️ first - patented - fully invitro engineered hair follicles in March 2018"
  - src: "Geneusbiotech Raw Data-Images of Hair-Confocal imaging of hair follicle-IVH hair D33 K75 DAPI_Render_Series3.jpg"
    caption: "BIOPRINTED HAIRFOLLICLE - STAINED WITH CELL MARKERS"
    alt: "BIOPRINTED HAIRFOLLICLE - STAINED WITH CELL MARKERS"
    title: "BIOPRINTED HAIRFOLLICLE - STAINED WITH CELL MARKERS"
  - src: "IMG_9093.jpg"
    caption: "The first ever physiological complete bioprintedFUROID™️ prototype with inseparably attached - bioengineered- hairfollicles (FUROID™️ Patent)"
    alt: "The first ever physiological complete bioprintedFUROID™️ prototype with inseparably attached - bioengineered- hairfollicles (FUROID™️ Patent)"
    title: "The first ever physiological complete bioprintedFUROID™️ prototype with inseparably attached - bioengineered- hairfollicles (FUROID™️ Patent)"
  - src: "BTH55_20171121_WT-iPSC-007-4dEB-3dafterTrans_3chir_0.5nMBMP4_1.JPEG"
    caption: "One of FUROID™️ first reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells for our hairfollicle patent in November 2017"
    alt: "One of FUROID™️ first reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells for our hairfollicle patent in November 2017"
    title: "One of FUROID™️ first reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells for our hairfollicle patent in November 2017"
  - src: "IMG_5508.JPG"
    caption: "A SEM microscope image of the first bioprinted FUROID™️ prototype with visible engineered dermal papilla cells (important for hairfollicle/fur formation)"
    alt: "A SEM microscope image of the first bioprinted FUROID™️ prototype with visible engineered dermal papilla cells (important for hairfollicle/fur formation)"
    title: "A SEM microscope image of the first bioprinted FUROID™️ prototype with visible engineered dermal papilla cells (important for hairfollicle/fur formation)"
  - src: "IMG_4285.JPG"
    caption: "Bright light image of an hairfollicle growing out of the bioprinted cultivated tissue"
    alt: "Bright light image of an hairfollicle growing out of the bioprinted cultivated tissue"
    title: "Bright light image of an hairfollicle growing out of the bioprinted cultivated tissue"
  - src: "IMG_4296.JPG"
    caption: "Confocal image of a stained [bioprinted] hairfollicle"
    alt: "Confocal image of a stained [bioprinted] hairfollicle"
    title: "Confocal image of a stained [bioprinted] hairfollicle"
  - src: "_MVA6168 13.27_0.JPG"
    caption: "MARIYA ZAKURNAEVA-KUNZ , CEO FUROID™️"
    alt: "MARIYA ZAKURNAEVA-KUNZ , CEO FUROID™️"
    title: "MARIYA ZAKURNAEVA-KUNZ , CEO FUROID™️"
draft: false
uuid: 10727
---
***EU-Pathfinder states that the project has the potential to represent
a significant technological advancement***

AMSTERDAM, April 15, 2022 - GENEUSBIOTECH has been awarded a grant from
the European Commission in the Pathfinder Challenge for its Furoid
technology. The Commission sees great potential in the innovative
process and has allocated more than EUR 4 million to further develop the
promising technology.

In its evaluation report, the Commission states that the proposal is
very good, scoring between 3.5 and 4.5 on a scale of 5. This, according
to the Commission, is evidence of a particularly excellent proposal. The
Commission also shares GENEUSBIOTECH's ambition of no longer using
animals for the production of fur, hair and wool by 2030, but through
*in vitro* production.

In its report, the evaluation committee describes GENEUSBIOTECH's
project as follows:

*\"The mission of FUROID is to enable animal-free production of hair
(humans), fur (endangered animals) or wool (sheep). The key innovation
is the development of continuous and scalable technology, enabling the
end of using living animals as a source of fur and wool and dominating
the market by 2030. Specifically, we will focus on the development of
engineered living fur (ELF).*

*\"This Evaluation Summary Report contains the final score decided by
the Pathfinder Challenges Evaluation Committee. It comprises a collation
of the comments from individual reports, or extracts from them, a
comment that summarises the assessment by the Evaluation Committee as
well as any additional comments. The Evaluation Committee drew its
conclusions on the basis of the remote score and the outcome of its
consensus discussions.*

*\"The comments from the individual evaluators are collated per
sub-criterion, so in the report the comments on each sub-criterion
reflect the opinions from all three evaluators. While not necessarily
subscribing to each and every opinion expressed, the Evaluation
Committee finds that the comments from the evaluators provide a fair
overall assessment, indicating both essential strengths and weaknesses
identified in the proposal.*

*\"The Evaluation Committee agrees with the evaluators who state that
developing different HLMs based on mammalian cells for engineered living
fur, hair, and wool using a scalable top-down technological approach is
directly related to and contributes to the overall goals of the
Challenge. The Evaluation Committee agrees with the evaluators who state
that the proposed project is highly ambitious and novel, and has the
potential to represent a significant technological advancement beyond
the current state of the art."*

**ABOUT FUROID™**

FUROID™ is a cultivated biomaterial developed especially for the fur
industry. The product is molecularly identical to animal fur, feels and
behaves the same but offers many more advantages. After all, the product
is 100% animal-friendly, extremely durable and hypoallergenic. It is
made through three dimensional bioprinting. This method combines cells
with growth factors and biomaterials to create biomedical parts, with
the aim of mimicking natural tissue properties. This is more or less
comparable with the technique for cultured meat.

GENEUSBIOTECH sees a huge gap in the market for FUROID™. Fur is the
oldest form of human clothing. In the early days of mankind, fur was a
means of braving the cold. Today, fur is the epitome of conspicuous
luxury. But all this comes at an enormous cost in terms of animal
suffering. Every year, more than 100 million animals are killed for
their fur. Since animal rights activists rightly point out this
unnecessary suffering and since it became clear last year that fur
animals can easily pass on COVID-19 to humans, the fashion industry has
been careful in promoting fur. Not a bad thing in itself, but the
downside of this is that it has led to an increase in the illegal trade
in fur with even worse consequences for the animals, and to the
emergence of synthetic alternatives that are very harmful to the
environment.

Since the problem is not fur itself, but rather the production method,
GENEUSBIOTECH has refined its technique to produce fur in an
animal-friendly manner. The approach is simple: to make fur acceptable
by eliminating animal suffering and toxic production methods to develop
synthetic variants. The researchers at GENEUSBIOTECH are acting in the
same way as the leather industry, which is also looking for alternatives
to natural leather derived from animal skins. Incidentally,
GENEUSBIOTECH has filed a patent for the technology in 2019 and last
year the company obtained approval on ethical grounds to set up
experiments to obtain cultivated wool.

GENEUSBIOTECH does not want to enter into a debate on whether or not to
wear fur. Fur must be recognised as a natural attire, but the way in
which it is obtained can and must be questioned. It is not acceptable
that millions of animals have to suffer to dress people. But people
should - if they choose 100% for sustainability (read animal friendly) -
be able to enjoy wearing fur. The intention of FUROID™ fits in with the
recent attempts by cellular food companies to create foods such as
caviar, foie gras and wagyu beef that are completely animal friendly and
can remove the dilemma between taste, pleasure, and guilt.

FUROID™ seeks a balance between luxury - in this case wearing fur - and
sustainability - in this case excluding animal suffering. FUROID™ wants
to give people the opportunity to wear fur, to be willing to pay the
price they deem necessary and yet not be burdened with a sense of guilt
for supporting an industry that uses animal abuse, illegal or not, as a
technique to get to the product. The fact that people want to live a
high-end lifestyle should not be a reason to fish these people out if
they agree to do so in a way that is good for the animals in particular
and our environment (read: no synthetic variants) in general.

**ABOUT GENEUSBIOTECH**

In May 2020, GENEUSBIOTECH entered into an R&D project with various
research institutions to further develop the technology of bioprinting.
This will include the cultivation of biomaterials such as cell-based
fur, as well as the cultivation of human hair for transplantation into
the scalp. GENEUSBIOTECH has patented the method it has developed.
Meanwhile, interest in the technology from the outside world is growing
and GENEUSBIOTECH was also a guest at the World Congress on Alternatives
to Animal Testing.

**MORE INFORMATION**

GENEUSBIOTECH BV\
Gustav Mahlerplein 28 - 1082 MA Amsterdam\
[www.furoid.com](http://www.furoid.com)
