---
title: "Molecular farming start-up Bright Biotech raises $3.2 million to grow and scale"
date: 2022-11-21 10:21:02
lastmod: 2022-11-21 10:21:02
slug: molecular-farming-start-bright-biotech-raises-32-million-grow-and-scale
company: 10455
description: "Molecular farming start-up Bright Biotech has closed a $3.2 million funding round. The oversubscribed Seed funding round was led by FoodLabs and includes world-class impact investors Big Idea Ventures, CPT Capital, the FoodHack syndicate and business angels."
excerpt: "Molecular farming start-up Bright Biotech has closed a $3.2 million funding round. The oversubscribed Seed funding round was led by FoodLabs and includes world-class impact investors Big Idea Ventures, CPT Capital, the FoodHack syndicate and business angels."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Molecular Farming]
products: [Meat, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Europe]
flags: [Press Release, Investments]
directory: [1303, 5660, 5819, 6280, 6600, 10455]
images: ["IMG_9989.jpg","bright-biotech_option-02.jpg", "IMG_9933.jpg", "IMG_9988.jpg"]
featured_image: "IMG_9989.jpg"
additional_images:
  - src: "bright-biotech_option-02.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
  - src: "IMG_9933.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
  - src: "IMG_9988.jpg"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 11199
---
-   Bright Biotech raises \$3.2M to solve the major cost driver in the
    production of cultivated meat
-   Bright Biotech's \$3.2M Seed Fund will help cultivated meat
    companies move to industrial production
-   Scaling production of growth factors for the cultivated meat
    industry and radically bringing cost down
-   Oversubscribed Seed funding round led by FoodLabs

**Manchester**, 17.11.2022: Molecular farming start-up Bright Biotech
has closed a \$3.2 million funding round. The oversubscribed Seed
funding round was led by FoodLabs and includes world-class impact
investors Big Idea Ventures, CPT Capital, the FoodHack syndicate and
business angels. Now, the company will foster its R&D for a new genetic
engineering method to make growth factors, expand their team of
high-profile scientists and scale their manufacturing operations.

"We are glad to have won such renowned and like-minded investors backing
our vision for a more sustainable food system", said Mohammad El Hajj,
co-founder and CEO of Bright Biotech. "With the fresh funding and our
growing team of experienced scientists and production experts we are set
for rapid commercialisation. Our technology is very timely for the
cultivated meat industry, and we are thrilled to be working with our
partners and investors to have the first products from our robust,
ultra-scalable and sustainable technology available on the market in
2023."

Driven by the vision to make our food system more sustainable, Bright
Biotech is bringing its revolutionary technology to the industry, moving
the world one step closer to enjoying the next generation of meat.

**Enabling the cultivated meat industry for a more sustainable food
industry**

Cultivated meat is a solution to the increasing demand for animal
proteins as the world continues to experience economic and population
growth. Animal factory farming is cruel and not sustainable. Enabled by
science, cultivated meat is biologically equivalent to meat from
animals. Industrialising cultivated meat will reverse the harm done to
animals, people and the environment and we get to keep the enjoyable,
delicious, and nutritious meat experiences.

Bright Biotech is a leader in chloroplast-based expression,
manufacturing growth factors in plants at minimal cost with staggering
yields. Growth factors are necessary proteins that promote cell
differentiation, growth and proliferation in the production of
cultivated meat. By significantly reducing the price of growth factors,
the largest cost drivers of the industry, Bright Biotech will facilitate
and enable the industrialisation of cultivated meat tackling a \$116
billion global industry by 2040.

**Growth factors are critical to achieving price parity for cultivated
meat**

Despite being used at very low concentrations, growth factors make up at
least 55% of the marginal cost of cultivated meat. They can cost several
million dollars a gram making them more expensive by weight than
diamonds. Up to three tonnes of various growth factors will have to be
produced annually for cultivated meat production to scale and gain only
one percent of the global protein market. Today, barriers for producing
cultivated meat at scale include the very high cost and bottlenecks in
the supply of growth factors*.*

"Bright Biotech\'s approach to harnessing chloroplasts for manufacturing
growth factors in plants can be a game changer for the cultivated meat
industry and will be a key enabler to achieve price parity", said
Christian Guba, Senior Associate at FoodLabs. "Mohammad and his team
have impressed us not only with their deep expertise but also with a
pace and progress rarely seen in terms of getting to market. We are very
excited to support them in building a global champion."

**An experienced and complementary team**

Manchester-based Bright Biotech was founded at the end of 2019 to
commercialise the technology of producing valuable proteins in
chloroplasts of plants. The company has received numerous awards and
endorsements from several distinguished institutions including Educate
North Award, The University of Manchester's Masood Entrepreneurship
Centre, EIT Food of the European Union, Innovate UK Edge and Innovation
Forum. The co-founders Mohammad El Hajj, Anil Day, Tariq Ali, Farid Khan
and Rania Deranieh, are a diverse team of highly qualified and
experienced scientists and entrepreneurs. Equipped with a strong
academic background in protein production and cell culture from leading
educational and research institutions in the UK, the US, Jordan and
Lebanon, the team can devise strong risk mitigation plans when technical
challenges arise and bring a project to successful completion.

Media contact: Mohammad El Hajj - Co-founder and CEO (email:
<mohammad.elhajj@brightbiotech.co.uk>; phone: +44 (0) 7500026503)

**About Bright Biotech**

Bright Biotech is a Manchester-based company using genetic engineering
of plants to provide a plentiful supply of growth factors for the
cultivated meat industry at a fraction of the current cost. The aim is
to allow cultivated meat to scale and reach price parity with
conventional meat and ultimately      contribute to our planet's health
by reducing our reliance on animal factory farming. The founding team
Anil Day, Farid Khan, Mohammad El Hajj, Rania Deranieh and Tariq Ali
have a strong academic background in protein production and cell culture
from leading educational and research institutions in the UK, the US,
Jordan and Lebanon, which enables strong risk mitigation when technical
challenges arise. Bright Biotech has been accelerated through
established programs including Innovation Forum ImagineIF!, EIT Food
Seedbed Incubator, EIT Food Accelerator Network, Big Idea Ventures
Accelerator, GROW Accelerator and support from the University of
Manchester's Masood Entrepreneurship Centre and Innovate UK Edge.

**About Food Labs**

Food Labs is a pan-European Early-Stage VC investor and venture studio
for food, sustainability and health. Food Labs strongly believe that
entrepreneurship holds the key to pushing the boundaries in the food
industry. Based in Berlin, FoodLabs has built and invested in more than
50 early-stage FoodTech companies since 2016. Food Labs is backing the
most ambitious, purpose-driven entrepreneurs, who are committed to
changing the world's largest industry. Food Labs has been an early
investor in some of the most seminal, fastest-growing European FoodTech
start-ups including Infarm, Meatable, Mushlabs, Sanity Group and Formo.

**About Big Idea Ventures**

Big Idea Ventures is a venture firm focused on solving the world\'s
greatest challenges by backing the world\'s best entrepreneurs,
scientists and engineers. Through its three funds - the New Protein
Fund, the Generation Food Rural Partners fund and the Strategic
Opportunities fund - Big Idea Ventures invests in the best food, food
technology and agritech companies globally. The firm has offices in New
York, Paris and Singapore and has already invested in more than 100
companies across 22 countries. For more visit
[www.bigideaventures.com](http://www.bigideaventures.com)**.**
