---
title: "Pascual Innoventures announces 2022 Mylkcubator cohort to develop milk of the future"
date: 2022-11-17 12:38:02
lastmod: 2022-11-17 12:38:02
slug: pascual-innoventures-announces-2022-mylkcubator-cohort-develop-milk-future
company: 10963
description: "Pascual Innoventures announces investments in two startups of the first cohort of Mylkcubator, De Novo Dairy and Zero Cow Factory, while welcoming five new startups for the new cohort, Maolac, Miruku, ERGO Bioscience, Nutropy and PFx Biotech."
excerpt: "Pascual Innoventures announces investments in two startups of the first cohort of Mylkcubator, De Novo Dairy and Zero Cow Factory, while welcoming five new startups for the new cohort, Maolac, Miruku, ERGO Bioscience, Nutropy and PFx Biotech."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial, Molecular Farming]
products: [Dairy]
topics: [Business]
regions: [Europe]
flags: [Press Release, Investments]
directory: [10451, 10963, 11147]
images: ["Mylkcubator 2.png"]
featured_image: "Mylkcubator 2.png"
draft: false
uuid: 11195
---
**Madrid, November 17, 2022**. Pascual Innoventures announces
investments in two startups of the first cohort of Mylkcubator, De Novo
Dairy and Zero Cow Factory, while welcoming five new startups for the
new cohort, Maolac, Miruku, ERGO Bioscience, Nutropy and PFx Biotech.

With just one year of operations, Pascual Innoventures, founded in 2021
to promote the food of the future, has already made its first
significant capital investment demonstrating its clear commitment to
innovation and fulfilling its goal to help to develop the milk of the
future. Specifically, it has invested in [De Novo
Dairy](https://www.denovodairy.com/) and [Zero Cow
Factory](https://zerocowfactory.com/), two of the four startups that
were part of the first cohort of Mylkcubator, the first incubator in the
world specialized in the development of innovation projects for the
dairy sector, launched by [Pascual
Innoventures](https://pascualinnoventures.com/) in partnership with
[Eatable Adventures](https://eatableadventures.com/).

De Novo Dairy and Zero Cow Factory, highly innovative, are specialized
in the development of cellular agriculture and precision fermentation
technologies, a segment currently gaining traction in the dairy sector.
These technologies, capable of directly producing nutrients and
ingredients for the dairy industry through microorganisms, **sum up and
complement the traditional industry**, helping industry players move
towards increasingly sustainable, efficient, and healthy mixed
production models that ensure food security for everyone. 

**Investment to address disruptive projects worldwide**

De Novo Dairy, based in South Africa, is focused on developing precision
fermentation technologies to create alternative proteins (Lactoferrin)
that can reproduce the same nutritional profiles and sensory experiences
as their dairy analogs. Zero Cow Factory, of Indian origin, seeks to
complement the traditional dairy industry by producing the first milk
and dairy products using bioengineering and microbial fermentation.

*Through these investments, says Gabriel Torres, director of Pascual
Innoventures, \"We intend to strengthen collaboration agreements to
launch new products with novel and expanded functionality, which improve
the quality of life of our consumers and allow us to enter new markets.
Together with De Novo Dairy, we will explore the production of
Lactoferrin, a high-value protein, essential in the development of
babies and a strengthener of the immune system. Together with Zero Cow,
we will work on the synthesis of Casein, a milk protein vital to achieve
a good flavor and texture of non-animal origin cheeses or yogurt \".*

Cell cultures and precision fermentation techniques are starting to
demonstrate industrial viability, as evidenced by the growth of
investment in this sector (currently more than 200 investors are
identified) and the emergence of new startups using these technologies
as a base, whose **total business value now exceeds \$5.316 million**,
according to Dealroom data.

In short, this is a sector whose ecosystem is evolving rapidly and
generating significant investment traction, both globally and locally.
This is supported by the numbers, **with investment in dairy
alternatives that tripled in 2021** compared to the previous year, from
US\$194 million to US\$605 million.

**2nd edition of Mylkcubator: meeting the global challenges of today and
tomorrow**

Today more than ever, the current global socioeconomic context
highlights the present and future challenges that the agri-food industry
will have to face. Among them, is being able to develop and apply
sustainable and efficient food production models that allow feeding a
world population that just in November already reached 8 billion people.
To this end, the promotion, development, and application of new
technologies complementary to the traditional sector will play a
fundamental role.

In this context, Pascual Innoventures and Eatable Adventures, aware of
the need for action, have launched Mylkcubator 2.0, the second edition
of this pioneering program worldwide.

\"*At Pascual Innoventures we are convinced that only through innovation
and commitment to disruptive food technologies we will be able to meet
the current challenges facing not only the agri-food sector but also the
global socioeconomic sector as a whole. Thanks to initiatives like
Mylkcubator, we will be able to evolve towards an efficient and
sustainable mixed production system that improves the lives of people,
animals, and the planet*\", said Gabriel Torres.

Itziar Ortega, VP of Global Operations at Eatable Adventures, adds that
*\"the collaboration of such relevant and committed players as Eatable
Adventures and Pascual Innoventures has allowed us to be pioneers and
one step ahead. We are sure that in the next few years, these
technologies will be consolidated and that Spain will undoubtedly
continue to set historic milestones, among other things, thanks to the
innovation of unique programs in the world such as Mylkcubator, which
drives the innovation ecosystem on a global scale\".*

**THE MYLKCUBATOR 2.0 PICKS**

[Maolac](https://www.maolac.com/) is an Israeli startup specializing in
the research of biofunctional ingredients to create precision proteins
with high nutritional capacity, inspired by milking milk. Its main goal
is to apply this technology to improve the health and well-being of both
humans and domestic animals.

Portuguese startup PFx Biotech focuses on commercializing bioactive and
functional human milk proteins as alternative protein ingredients for
use in pediatric and advanced nutrition. They use a high-tech precision
fermentation process to ensure the well-being of people and care for the
planet

[Miruku](https://miruku.com/), from New Zealand, is a leader in the
emerging molecular farming sector. Its mission is to provide
sustainable, nutritious, and cost-effective dairy products by applying
molecular farming technologies to program plant cells and produce
proteins and fats suitable for the creation of plant-based dairy
products.

[ERGO Bioscience](https://ergofoods.com/index-es.php), an Argentine
startup focused on the development of complex animal proteins, has
succeeded in developing an innovative process to create alternative
foods of plant origin. Its goal is to achieve products organoleptically
identical to those of animal origin. Among its portfolio of proteins are
Alfa-S1 and Kappa caseins, for dairy applications of plant origin, and
myoglobin for meat applications of plant origin.

[Nutropy](https://nutropy.com/) is a French startup dedicated to the
production of dairy ingredients by feeding the yeast with sugars,
minerals, and vitamins. These ingredients are identical to those
produced by cows and make it possible to develop alternatives to dairy
products without quitting the original taste.
