---
title: "23 Start-Ups Applying Groundbreaking Technology to Achieve the Ultimate Goal: Sustainable Nutrition"
date: 2021-09-09 11:53:10
lastmod: 2021-09-09 11:53:10
slug: 23-start-ups-applying-groundbreaking-technology-achieve-ultimate-goal-sustainable
company_name: "Future Food-Tech"
company_link: "https://futurefoodtechlondon.com/"
description: "The Future Food-Tech summit on September 30 – October 1 will present 23 pioneering innovators from across the globe, showcasing fresh solutions across health and nutrition."
excerpt: "The Future Food-Tech summit on September 30 – October 1 will present 23 pioneering innovators from across the globe, showcasing fresh solutions across health and nutrition."
proteins: [Plant-Based, Microbial]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Eggs, Ingredients]
topics: [Business]
regions: [International]
flags: [Press Release]
images: ["FFTLON21 - Meet the start-ups 2021.jpg","FFTLON21 - Meet The Start-Ups.png"]
featured_image: "FFTLON21 - Meet the start-ups 2021.jpg"
additional_images:
  - src: "FFTLON21 - Meet The Start-Ups.png"
    caption: ""
    alt: ""
    title: ""
draft: false
uuid: 9659
---
Growing consumer awareness of the source of their diet, its nutritional
content and environmental impact, is driving food-tech innovators to
create new solutions that optimise nutrition and can be produced
sustainably at scale.

The Future Food-Tech summit on September 30 -- October 1 will present 23
pioneering innovators from across the globe, showcasing fresh solutions
across health and nutrition. These include: **precision and microbial
fermentation, food as medicine, functional ingredients, plant-based
alternatives, personalised nutrition, AI and data science, supply chain
transparency, biotechnology, sugar reduction** and **the microbiome**

Discover them all in our Start-Up Showcase, Step Up to the Plate
demonstration, the Kraft Heinz Innovation Challenge Finale and the
Start-Up Exhibition.

**Precision Fermentation**

"Our mission at **De Novo Dairy** is to create fully functional dairy
proteins using precision fermentation, to seamlessly replace dairy in
the food industry. Ultimately, we want consumers to continue to enjoy
the same sensory experiences from eating non-animal dairy products as
they would from traditional dairy (from cows)," shares **Leah Bessa,**
*Co-Founder* at **De Novo Dairy** (South Africa) **-** Africa\'s first
food-tech company focusing on precision fermentation to produce
functional, sustainable dairy proteins.

\"At QOA, we tried to replicate the flavour as well as the smooth
melting behaviour using fermentation processes like beer-brewing. QOA is
100% natural and made in a highly sustainable, circular way," explains
**Maximilian Marquart,** *Founder & CEO* at **QOA** (Germany) -
producing the world\'s first 100% cocoa-free chocolate through precision
fermentation with special microorganisms.

**Microbial Fermentation**

"**Blue Heron** is a next-generation plant-based innovator and producer
of 100% dairy-free, vegan artisan cheeses. We use true cheese-making
methodologies by utilising a proprietary science-first approach with
active bacterial cultures and enzymes specific to plant-based protein
reactions," shares **Karen McAthy**, *CEO* at **Blue Heron** (Canada) -
prioritising microbial fermentation and aging methods in the creation of
its cheeses.

**Food as Medicine**

"At **FYXX** **Health**, we take proven active ingredients like
probiotics, fibre, beta glucans, key minerals, vitamins, and herbs and
turn them into low sugar, low carb snacks, cookies, sweets and beverage
mixes making it fun and easy to snack healthily," notes **Sung Park**,
*CEO* at **FYXX Health** (USA) - combining the right supplements with
the right diet, is the company's formula for combating chronic disease
and preventing illness.

"**Healthycell** uses patent-pending MICROGEL™ technology to deliver
nutrients that consumers can absorb and results they can measure in a
pill-free experience they love. Our dietary supplement products are
taken straight from the gel pack, mixed into drinks, or blended into
smoothies," explains **Douglas Giampapa,** *Founder and CEO* at
**Healthycell** (USA) - helping people reach their potential through
optimised health with a new platform for dietary micronutrient delivery.

"**Healright\'s** Health From WithinTM provides micronutrients and
fibres that deliver life-changing results. Scientifically developed and
clinically tested, Healright evidence-based daily micronutrition
products are for optimal gut performance to support and maintain good
health," details **Rebecca McKinnon,** *Clinical Specialist* at
**Healright** (USA) - an Advanced Micronutrition Food as Medicine brand.

**Plant-Based Alternatives**

"Foregoing industry standards such as extrusion, **Sundial Foods** is
creating complex plant-based whole cuts with skin, meat, and bone that
look, cook, and taste delicious. Our chicken wings, launching soon in
California, are made from eight clean-label ingredients, one of which is
water," says, **Jessica Schwabach**, *CEO* at **Sundial Foods** (USA) -
leveraging technology to develop solutions that are more sustainable
while remaining nutritionally competitive.

\"At **Yo-Egg**, we strongly believe people really do want a humane
alternative to the traditional egg. You see it in the growing demand for
organic or cage free eggs. The change is driven by the consumers, at
Yo-Egg we are simply making it easier for them to switch. Our sunny side
up and poached eggs are only the beginning. There are a lot of surprises
coming up," shares **Eran Groner**, *Co-Founder and CEO* at **Yo-Egg**
(Israel)- producing Yo! Sunny Side Up and Yo! Poached eggs for the
foodservice and retail.

**"AuraPea** is launching new, patented products for food service, CPG,
and e-commerce channels that are free of soy, meat, methylcellulose,
lactose, gluten, and allergens," explains **Benjamin Pasternak**,
*President and CEO* at **AuraPea** (USA)  - combining excellent taste
and texture with a clean label, the products use sous vide cooking
methods to provide superior plant-based protein alternatives.

**AI Technology and Data Science**

"CPG R&D teams don't have time to aggregate the volumes of data that are
scattered across their enterprise on forgotten hard-drives and
spreadsheets. We built **Turing Labs** to require 50% less data than
traditional algorithms to empower product development teams to achieve
record-breaking discoveries with minimal effort," outlines **Ajith
Govind**, *Co-Founder and Chief Product Officer,* at **Turing Labs**
(USA) - disrupting the traditional CPG development process through its
modelling and simulation platform that uses modern AI techniques to
improve product development speed by 10x while using far less data than
previously required.

"**Alberts** makes healthy food accessible to anyone, anywhere, at any
time. The Alberts Smoothie Station combines robotics and AI, to prepare
personalised, 100% natural blends (like smoothies and soups) on the
spot," reveals **Glenn Mathijssen**, *CEO and Co-Founder* at **Alberts**
(Belgium) -- making a healthy life the easiest option.

"By enabling the conversation between microbiome data and the scientist,
**Eagle Genomics** is unlocking a new era of collaborative, data-driven
innovation. It allows companies to seize the opportunities of the Bio
Revolution and tackle the Grand Challenges facing the world today,"
shares **Anthony Finbow**, *CEO* at **Eagle Genomics** (UK) **-**
supporting the entire innovation workflow, from hypothesis through
insight to microbiome-based product claims to help bring novel, safer
and sustainable food products to market, faster.

**Functional Ingredients**

"**Cuzena** was first to market in introducing Ful Madamous to retail in
a ready-made format. A staple dish of the Middle East made from fava
beans rich in plant protein. My love for Arabic flavours prompted me to
explore innovative cuisine, uncomplicated food straight to the table.
Blending familiar with the bold in introducing a full Middle Eastern
dining experience. To excite, educate and nourish," explains **Shadia Al
Hili**, *CEO* at **Cuzena** (UK) - providing an environmentally
friendly, sustainable alternative to soya.

"**Full wrap** has created an innovative gluten-free tortilla made of
sprouted legumes that is also flexible, easy to use and full of whole
protein. We do not use any preservatives or food colouring and our
products are also vegan," shares **Rachely Bitterman**, *Head of
Innovation* at **Full wrap** (Israel) - developing products including
legumes tortillas made of orange lentils, chickpeas, green buckwheat and
green peas.

"**JaziLupini** is a clean-label company on a mission to bring about
change in the way people consume their proteins by introducing the
severely under-utilized sustainable crop, lupin, to the market in
innovative ways," notes **Jazz Sanchez**, *Founder* at **JaziLupini** -
offering a healthy, tasty pasta alternative.

**Kaffe Bueno** uses green chemistry and biotechnology to upcycle
coffee\'s post-consumption by-product into active and functional
ingredients for nutraceuticals, and functional foods and cosmetics,"
explains **Juan Medina**, *Co-Founder and CEO* at **Kaffee Bueno**
(Denmark) -- Using pure science to demonstrate the health-promoting
power in coffee.

**Sugar Reduction**

"At **GlucoZero** our mission is to provide technology to produce a new
category of appealing foods with real health benefits that will help
fight the global overweight epidemic and allow everybody, including
individuals with impaired glucose metabolism and diabetes, to consume
fruit drinks with the typical juice and smoothie taste," shares **Jürgen
Schrezenmeir**, *Co-Founder* at **GlucoZero** (Germany). The start-up
company has the exclusive exploitation rights of a patent on production
of juice and fruit preparations with low glycaemic response and
preserved juice taste.

**Personalised Nutrition**

"**Happ** believes that the 'future of food is personal'. It is building
a Personalised Food Navigator -- an ecosystem of partners, consumers to
offer food as a service -- at the comfort of your home, work, restaurant
, fitness club, sports canteen and much more," explains Divya Gautam,
CEO at **Happ** (The Netherlands) - an innovative food-tech start-up
focusing on the personalised nutrition market with ambition to scale
pan-EU by 2022.

**The Microbiome**

"**The Gut Stuff** was created by my twin sister Alana and I (The Mac
Twins). Twins are a great constant for medical research, and we became
the "chief guinea pigs" for the Twin Research department at Kings
College, where they discovered that despite having 100% the same DNA our
guts have only 30/40% the same microbiota. We've made it our mission to
bring the exciting information they were learning, to the masses,"
details **Lisa Macfarlane**, *Co-Founder and Co-CEO* at **The Gut
Stuff** (UK) - bringing efficacious, delicious and affordable snack bars
and fermentation kits to the masses.

"**Evivo by Evolve** pioneers research in the infant gut microbiome and
our products uniquely colonise the infant gut, creating lifelong health
for all infants worldwide. Our technology restores the functional losses
in new-born gut deficiency (NGD), the inability to metabolise human milk
oligosaccharide, the third most abundant component of breastmilk,"
shares **Tracy Shafizadeh,** *Director of Scientific Communications* at
**Evivo by Evolve** (USA) - a commercial-stage microbiome company,
launched from the Food for Health Institute at UC Davis.

**Biotechnology**

"In the near future, distributed diagnostics capability will be key to
assessing the risks to health on a large scale in real time. The Hyris
system enables the deployment of advanced genetic testing right when and
where needed such as directly at the production plant or farm. This
innovation breaks the current logistics and value chains, putting the
user back at the centre of the analytical process," explains **Stefano
Lo Priore,** *Founder and CEO* at **Hyris** (UK) - easing the access to
molecular testing solutions to a much larger cohort of users.

"At **EnginZyme** we produce chemicals that are cost-efficient,
sustainable and scalable, either alone or with partners. Our aim is to
commercialise novel products starting in 2023. The research is focused
on the broad efficient utilisation of enzymes for better chemicals,"
shares **Jordi Lopez**, *Business Development Director* at **EnginZyme**
(Sweden)  - unlocking the potential of enzymes for better food and
chemicals with their new technology platform.

**Food Transparency**

"**Connecting Food**'s platform is powered by blockchain, a technology
which enabled us to build LiveAudit®, a fully digitalised auditing
module. LiveAudit® provides real-time traceability of products and
audits their quality, ensuring that every promise made to the consumer
is kept," explains **Samantha Gadenne,** *Global Sales Director* at
**Connecting Food** (France) - offering digital transparency solutions
which create value for agri-food players and restore consumer confidence
in food.

**Many more game-changing early and mid-stage companies will join the
Future Food-Tech summit on Sept 30 -- Oct 1, which will bring together
food brands, retailers, ingredient manufacturers, technology providers
and investors for two days of high impact online networking and
knowledge-exchange. Also for an evening of live sessions and networking
in London on September 30.**

**The full programme, speaking faculty and delegate registration are
available now at**
[**www.futurefoodtechlondon.com**](http://www.futurefoodtechlondon.com)
