---
title: "Breast Milk Start-Up Helaina Aims to Improve Upon an Old Formula"
date: 2020-06-03 18:25:08
lastmod: 2020-06-03 18:25:08
slug: breast-milk-start-helaina-aims-improve-upon-old-formula
description: "While most grocery stores now stock a seemingly endless variety of dairy alternatives derived from nuts, seeds, or grains, what most consumers don’t yet know is that a new kind of real milk—created not by cows but scientists—will likely be joining them on the shelves very soon."
excerpt: "While most grocery stores now stock a seemingly endless variety of dairy alternatives derived from nuts, seeds, or grains, what most consumers don’t yet know is that a new kind of real milk—created not by cows but scientists—will likely be joining them on the shelves very soon."
proteins: [Microbial]
products: [Dairy]
topics: [Business, Health]
regions: [US & Canada]
flags: [Editors' Picks, Featured]
directory: [1249, 6178, 7022]
contributors: [8110]
images: ["Helaina Team.jpg"]
featured_image: "Helaina Team.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "From left, Helaina team members Michael Cohen, George Unc, Laura Katz, and Roma Vishwanath in the lab."
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 7032
---
While most grocery stores now stock a seemingly endless variety of dairy
alternatives derived from nuts, seeds, or grains, what most consumers
don't yet know is that a new kind of real milk---created not by cows but
scientists---will likely be joining them on the shelves very soon.

And while much of the plant- and cell-based dairy industry is working to
carve out its niche among the lactose-intolerant, environmentally
conscious, or cruelty-free crowds, New York-based startup
[Helaina](/directory/helaina) is in the lab working to appease an even
more discriminating consumer---babies. Or maybe more accurately,
their parents.

**The Challenge**

"Something most people don't know is that 87% of babies are fed formula
at some point," says Laura Katz, Founder and CEO of Helaina. Katz (who
is also an Adjunct Professor in the Department of Nutrition and Food
Studies at New York University) worked in the food science industry for
years and while she saw opportunity in the burgeoning alternative
[meat](/meat) and [dairy](/dairy) categories, launching a start-up
solely for the sake of making another alternative dairy product was not
necessarily on her agenda. Instead, she was more interested in
developing a solution to a different problem.

"I've been a vegetarian for 14 years and I've also always just been
really interested in matters of women's health," Katz told *Protein
Report*. Seeing an opportunity to pair her values with her work, Katz
launched an extensive research process, speaking to as many mothers as
she could to see where problems were arising and where she could help.
One topic that kept coming up? The challenges of breastfeeding.

Medical professionals have touted the benefits of breast milk for
decades and, if prompted, you could probably rattle them off in your
head---improved immunity, decreased incidence of allergies, fewer middle
ear infections, purportedly higher IQ. The mantra "breast is best" is
one every pregnant woman has heard for decades. That's where that 87%
stat becomes important.

Because while most every woman is encouraged to breast-feed, it doesn't
mean every woman *can* exclusively provide nutrition in that way (nor
may want to).

Barriers to breast-feeding are myriad and can range from the biological
(not wanting to pass on infectious disease, a baby unable to breakdown
certain amino acids or lactose) and the mechanical (past surgical
interventions, a baby's inability to properly latch) to the situational
(ask any person who has had to discreetly duck out of a meeting at work
to pump). To Katz, this represented an opportunity not to just to make
feeding more convenient and accessible to the nursing parent, but more
inclusive to the non-nursing partners, including trans or cisgender
male parents.

Katz also recognized a particular need for her product in the United
States, where parental leave policies are minimal and nursing parents
too often bear the brunt of the nutritional workload. Formula has long
served this role as a parental labor equalizer, yet as the sole
alternative to breast milk, it rarely innovated except where regulators
insisted the industry meet specific nutritional or
protection benchmarks.

**Current Options**

Commercially made formulas have been available to parents since the late
19th Century but it wasn't until targeted and intensive marketing to
doctors and hospitals in the 1950s that formula began its ascendance. By
the early 1970s, only 14% of two- to three-month-old infants were being
breast-fed in the United States.1

But just as a post-WWII baby boom, the influx of women into the
workforce, and a cultural love affair with science nudged those
mid-century parents toward formula, current consumer culture now
increasingly demands foods be as natural as possible. What "natural"
means, of course, is largely consumer-driven and always evolving.

This is where Helaina and companies like it see a huge opportunity to
disrupt the staid formula industry.

**The Methodology**

Unlike the advertising of the 50s and 60s, what Helaina is working on
doesn't position itself as a better alternative to breast milk. No
matter how perfect a milk the lab can create, it can't replicate a
mother's immunity or hormones that can be transferred during nursing.
But what it can do potentially, is be a better alternative to the only
other option parents have right now, offering more easily digested
nutrition than formula, a composition much closer to breast milk itself,
and introduce beneficial bacteria for a baby's developing microbiome.

Helaina's milk is developed using technology borrowed from food science.
Using yeast, Helaina's lab nurtures a fermentation process that results
in a unique microflora that can express milk. According to Katz,
rigorous procedural guidelines ensure consistent nutritional composition
and quality.

Several other companies, including Singapore-based [TurtleTree
Labs](/directory/turtletree-labs) and North Carolina-based
[Biomilq](/directory/biomilq), are also racing to develop breast milk
for the consumer market. Unlike Helaina, these companies are utilizing
cell-based technology (though Biomilq prefers the term "cultured
breastmilk"). As with most start-ups, it can be difficult to glean
specifics about their proprietary methodology, but we do know that
TurtleTree Labs' process begins with stem cells, which they then use to
create human mammary cells which yield real breast milk. Biomilq's
process appears to be similar but their mammary cells are derived from
commercially available lines.

**The Outlook**

Helaina declines to share a go-to-market date estimate but, as Katz
acknowledged, they may have an advantage on other companies racing to
develop breast milk because their product is fermented, a process
regulators (including the FDA) already have established rules and
guidelines for. In contrast, cell-based competitors will likely be
slower to market as their techniques are coming not from the realm of
food-science but medical-science, which presents many more
regulatory hurdles.

Consumers will no doubt have to do a bit of conceptual gymnastics to
understand just how quickly this sector of the food industry is growing.
Instead of alternatives to dairy made with, for instance, soy or nuts,
it's harder to categorize exactly what you'd call Helaina's product.
Katz acknowledges her company (and the larger alternative dairy industry
as a whole) may have to do some heavy lifting when it comes to consumer
education. And while the company refers to its product as "fermented
milk" there's no doubt it's real milk. It's just that with no humans or
animals as its source, it may be time for our vocabulary about these
products to catch up with the products themselves.

Fomon, Samuel J. "Infant Feeding in the 20th Century: Formula and
Beikost." The Journal of Nutrition 131, no. 2 (February 1, 2001):
409S--420S. <https://academic.oup.com/jn/article/131/2/409S/4686955#FN1>
