---
title: "Could Molecular Farming Unlock the Secret of Cheese?"
date: 2022-03-01 14:00:09
lastmod: 2022-03-01 14:00:09
slug: could-molecular-farming-unlock-secret-cheese
description: "Gene-recombinant biotechnologies aim to produce key animal proteins at a fraction of the cost of conventional animal husbandry. The implications for research, medicine, food systems, and the climate could be huge. But can these emergent technologies scale quickly enough to spur system-wide change?"
excerpt: "Gene-recombinant biotechnologies aim to produce key animal proteins at a fraction of the cost of conventional animal husbandry. The implications for research, medicine, food systems, and the climate could be huge. But can these emergent technologies scale quickly enough to spur system-wide change?"
proteins: [Cell-Based, Molecular Farming]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Ingredients]
topics: [Business, Sci-Tech]
regions: [Europe, US & Canada]
flags: [Featured]
directory: [5897, 7241, 8754, 9366]
contributors: [8107]
images: ["Greenhouse 2.jpg"]
featured_image: "Greenhouse 2.jpg"
featured_image_caption: "These aren't your typical soybean plants. Molecular farming startup Nobell Foods has engineered them to produce casein, the dairy protein needed to make real cheese, sans cow. Copyright Nobell Foods."
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 10467
---
***Gene-recombinant biotechnologies aim to produce key animal proteins
at a fraction of the cost of conventional animal husbandry. The
implications for research, medicine, food systems, and the climate could
be huge. But can these emergent technologies scale quickly enough to
spur system-wide change?***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When it comes to trading in meat and dairy for plant-based products,
cheese is a sticking point. Even as alternative meats and milks have
grown more diverse and sophisticated, the distinctive meltiness and
stretchiness of good cheese has remained elusive. But from an
environmental perspective cheese is just as problematic as many kinds of
meat, boasting the [third
largest](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/science.aaq0216)
carbon emissions footprint of any animal food product. And with cheese
consumption at an [all-time
high](https://www.idfa.org/news/american-dairy-consumption-reaches-all-time-high-cheese-butter-and-yogurt-continue-to-drive-growth-for-dairy-industry)
--- even as dairy milk consumption [has
decreased](https://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=102446)
in countries like the US --- solving the problem of cheese is only
growing more urgent. As Magi Richani puts it: "It feels like the
last frontier."

Richani is the founder and CEO at [Nobell
Foods](/directory/nobell-foods), one of a handful of startups that have
recently been making their mark on that frontier using an emergent
technology known as [molecular farming](/molecular-farming). Where
previous plant-based meats and cheeses have been made from plant
materials manipulated to resemble animal products, molecular farming
uses plants as a "machine" to produce actual animal proteins.

"Plants, in particular soybeans, are very efficient at making proteins,"
says Richani. And they're flexible: by modifying a plant's
protein-encoding RNA, scientists can direct it to produce any kind of
protein desirable. This can include casein, the main dairy protein found
in milk that gives cheese its unique properties. Once plants expressing
the casein produce seeds, the protein can be harvested, and then
combined with plant fats and minerals in a cheesemaking process.

"We are essentially using these plants as mini factories," explains
France-Emmanuelle Adil, founder and CEO of [Tiamat
Sciences](/directory/tiamat-sciences), another molecular farming
startup. And the new assembly line isn't limited to food applications:
Tiamat Sciences plans to use its platform to produce custom proteins in
as little as three months. "We use the DNA of the protein of interest
and incorporate it into a plant pathogen that will 'hack' the plant
cells to make them produce our protein of interest." Possible
applications could include cell therapy and vaccine development, but for
now, Tiamat Sciences is focused on solving a particularly tricky and
fundamental problem in cellular agriculture: the production of
cells themselves.

"Cellular agriculture is a field that aims to produce animal proteins
without the animal, but one of the big impediments is the media that
cells are cultured in," Adil says. Historically, growing cells in a lab
has relied on media made using fetal bovine serum, or FBS, a byproduct
of the dairy industry that is singularly rich with the proteins
necessary for cell growth. "If we can produce these same growth factors
using our platform, cellular agriculture can truly be animal free,"
Adil says.

There could be a bottom line benefit as well, as molecular farming
provides a more streamlined route to animal proteins than farming the
animals themselves. Indeed, Richani notes, "cows are not very efficient
at turning plants into dairy: it takes ten pounds of plant protein to
make one pound of dairy protein and an average of 600 gallons of water
to make one gallon of milk." According to Adil, it is already 10 times
cheaper to produce most animal proteins using molecular farming than by
conventional animal agriculture methods. By 2025, she estimates, it
could be 1000 times cheaper.

With so many potential uses for the technology, it may be only a matter
of time before the products of molecular farming are a regular presence
in daily life. Already, consumers can purchase skin care products made
using molecular farming techniques, such as those from Icelandic company
[ORF Genetics](/directory/orf-genetics), in department stores. But as
molecular farming seeks to fundamentally change the food system,
appealing to a majority of likely skeptical consumers remains a
challenge. Nobell Foods has often described their target demographic as
the 99 percent of the population that is unwilling to compromise on
taste and price. "We know from experience that unless food is delicious,
affordable, and accessible, it will be hard to drive meaningful
adoption," Richani says.

Adam Tarshis, CEO of [Mozza Foods](/directory/mozza-foods), a Los
Angeles-based startup working on producing real dairy cheese from
plants, considers success to be a replication of mainstream products
like Cheez Whiz and Domino's Pizza. He sympathizes with consumers who
have been dissatisfied with current cheese alternatives: himself,
despite being primarily driven by animal welfare concerns, initially
resisted giving up animal-based cheese. "The fact that I, as someone who
was always thinking about the sustainability of food production, wasn't
willing to make that change speaks volumes about how the majority of
consumers would be even less inclined." His goal, he says, is to find
the largest audience possible and deliver on a promise: "We can make the
same great food but in a better way."

Making products of molecular farming accessible and affordable will
depend on the technology's scalability. With plants reliably producing
casein proteins, companies are shifting focus to the production of other
proteins of interest; then, they will focus on incrementally increasing
seed production. "This is critical," Tarshis says. "Once we've made the
proteins, the question is, how much can we make?"

Still, some of the challenges molecular farming startups currently face
are non-technical. "I'm optimistic that people will come to accept the
proteins in the molecular farming space are safe," Tarshis says,
especially given their environmental and animal welfare benefits.
"People care." Tarshis anticipates regulators including the United
States Department of Agriculture and the Food and Drug Administration to
begin developing industry guidelines over the next year or two.

Funding can also be a major hurdle for emergent biotechnologies.
"Development in this industry can take a long time --- 10 to 15 years
sometimes," says Dr. Björn Örvar, CSO and co-founder of ORF Genetics.
"Companies in this field need to be flexible. In a way, companies have
to be thinking in the short term so that they can bring a product to
market as fast as possible." ORF Genetics intends to supply its growth
factor --- MESOkine --- to a number of companies in the cell-based meat
industry and work on scaling up for the pharmaceutical industry over the
next several years. Mozza Foods hopes to bring their products to market
in 2025 under the brand name Lovely Cheese, while Nobell Foods is in the
commercialization phase and plans to bring their first products to
market by the beginning of 2023.

Most investor support for molecular farming has come from specialty
funders so far, but recently, mainstream investors like Kraft, Unilever,
and Nestle have shown newfound interest. "I think that just goes to show
how much potential this field has and that it's starting to gain wider
recognition. That being said, I think we also have to have a realistic
understanding of timelines," Tarshis says. "Just because we have the
science, that doesn't mean it's going to be there tomorrow."

Still, early innovations by these and other molecular farming startups
may herald a necessary system-wide change. "I hope that everyone who
cares about the environment keeps an open mind about how we are going to
feed an extra billion over the next couple of years," Tarshis says.
"This is part of what it will take to have a radical shift in how we
produce our food."
