---
title: "Innovative Cellular Agriculture Technique to Produce Real Taste and Texture in Cultured Meat"
date: 2021-11-03 08:55:10
lastmod: 2021-11-03 08:55:10
slug: innovative-cellular-agriculture-technique-produce-real-taste-and-texture-cultured-meat
description: "This essay is third-place winner of the Student Essay Contest 2021. Rahul Harshath Elangovan is a master’s degree student in the Department of Food Science at the University of Melbourne."
excerpt: "This essay is third-place winner of the Student Essay Contest 2021. Rahul Harshath Elangovan is a master’s degree student in the Department of Food Science at the University of Melbourne."
proteins: [Cell-Based, Algae]
products: [Meat]
topics: [Sci-Tech]
regions: [International, Oceania]
flags: [NA]
essay_contest: [Third Place]
contributors: [9843]
images: ["rahul_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "rahul_0.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 8000
uuid: 9844
---
***This essay is third-place winner of the [Student Essay Contest
2021](https://www.proteinreport.org/student-essay-contest-2021). Rahul
Harshath Elangovan is a master's degree student in the Department of
Food Science at the University of Melbourne.***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Introduction**

Cellular agriculture is an innovative solution where the agricultural
products are manufactured at the cellular level that is similar to the
traditional agricultural products. Cellular agriculture is considered to
be the more sustainable and environmentally friendly method due to its
ability to emit fewer greenhouse gases and require less water and fewer
land resources than traditional agriculture practices (Eibl et al.,
2021). But there are still numerous challenges for cellular agriculture
like obtaining tissues with similar texture, media optimization, etc.,
Addressing these challenges and finding promising solutions is the need
of the hour.

One of the issues with cellular agriculture comes in the field of
cultivating meat. Many academic and industrial researchers are working
to improve the meat quality that is produced by cellular agriculture
technology. The structure and thickness of the cultured meat are
important factors that have garnered the attention of the global
cell-based pioneers. As a food technologist with a biotechnology
background, my interest also lies in culturing and harvesting cells to
develop cultured meat that is at par with conventional meat in terms of
sensory attributes. One of the major issues in cell cultivation that
hinders providing textured meat tissues is the increased accumulation of
lactate that has been proved to be deleterious for the cultured tissues.
The accumulation of lactate in the media changes the pH of the cell
medium, turning the medium into a hostile environment for the cells.
This essay focuses on the potential solution to improve cultured tissue
quality by reducing tissue damage --- a co-culture system where the
tissues are cultivated along with microalgae.

**Our issue of focus**

One of the most important components of meat is its characteristic
texture that provides the taste to the consumers. The texture of the
meat tissues influences the "mouthfeel" provided by the meat. The
texture of the meat tissue should be thick enough to not crumble while
cooking and should be tender enough to provide the mouthfeel and flavor
(Arshad et al., 2018). To obtain a similar texture in cultivated meat,
three-dimensional (3D) tissue fabrication is being utilized. Currently,
in-vitro cultivation of tissue with a thickness of more than 50 μm
without the capillary networks seems to be a distant goal that needs to
be achieved to impart the livestock meat-like texture (Haraguchi &
Shimizu, 2021). This is due to the lack of vascularization in cultured
meat. In conventional meat, the presence of blood vessels facilitates
the transfer of nutrients and oxygen to the cells to promote the growth
of healthy tissues. A lack of blood vessels hinders the efficient
transfer of nutrients and oxygen to cells that are present in the deep
of thick tissues, thereby causing cell death. Modification in the tissue
culture system can provide a potential solution to achieve the texture
by developing thicker tissues without the vascular system.

**Introduction to Tissue Engineering**

Tissue engineering is an interdisciplinary field where the concepts of
engineering and life sciences are utilized for the development of
substitute biological tissues that function similarly to the natural
tissues (Carletti, Motta, & Migliaresi, 2011). Cell-based meat is meat
tissues that are cultivated in a controlled environment that mimics the
natural environment of the animal body. In order to mimic the animal
body environment, we need four important inputs, namely:

-   Cell Source
-   Cell Culture Media
-   Bioreactor
-   Scaffold

The culture media, bioreactor, and the scaffold design are decided based
on the type of cell source and the type of cells that has to be
cultivated ("Lab Grown Meat --- Everything You Need to Know About
Cultured Meat", n.d.). Figure 1 illustrates the process involved in the
cultivated meat production.

Fig. 1. Graphic of Cultured Meat Production (Djisalov et al., 2021)

For the cells to grow in vitro, we need to provide the required
nutrients through the growth media. The growth media should essentially
contain all the nutrients that the cells get inside an animal's body.
The components of the growth media are:

-   Carbohydrates
-   Amino acids
-   Fats
-   Vitamins
-   Minerals
-   Growth stimuli (signaling molecules)

With these molecules present in the right proportion, the growth media
nurtures the cells to grow and promotes the cells to differentiate into
different types of cells that make up the end product meat (O'Neill,
Cosenza, Baar, & Block, 2021).

With the nutrients provided via growth media, the cells proliferate
within a bioreactor. To obtain thicker and structured meat-like tissues,
the cells need to be transferred into suitable scaffolds. The role of
scaffolds is to promote three-dimensional cell growth with continuous
perfusion to the growth media. Selection of the suitable scaffold
depends on various factors such as mechanical properties, porosity,
biocompatibility, etc., ("Cultivated meat scaffolding \| Deep dive \|
GFI", n.d.).

Following the growth in scaffolds, the cultivated meat gets harvested.
At the harvesting stage, the cultivated meat looks no different from the
conventional meat. But, cultivated meat takes less time to produce the
meat than the conventional one, thanks to cellular agriculture
technology. Figure 2 shows the difference between the cellular
agriculture method and the animal agriculture method for producing the
same end product - meat.

Fig.2. The difference in process between Cellular Agriculture and Animal
Agriculture (How Is Cultivated Meat Made?, 2021)

**Reason for Tissue Damage**

Tissue formation metabolism involves a complex chemical reaction that
requires adequate energy. The growth media is packed full of nutrients
for energy provision to the cells to successfully carry out the tissue
formation process. The growth media is usually rich in glucose and
glutamine, compounds that are mandatory to achieve rapid cell growth.
The cultured cells feed on glucose rapidly for their growth
(Buchsteiner, Quek, Gray, & Nielsen, 2018). This is considered an
inefficient process because of the low amount of energy obtained per
glucose molecule consumed. The energy transfer ratio is 2:1 (2 moles of
energy compound for one mole of glucose consumed), which is not
efficient for culturing cells (Venkatesh, Darunte, & Bhat, 2013). This
is also known as the "Warburg Effect", where the increased glucose
consumption by the cells leads to the increase in the accumulation of
lactate, a toxic metabolic waste that damages the cells. Figure 3 shows
the Warburg effect pathway.

[Fig.3. Schematic Representation of the Warburg Effect (Venkatesh et
al., 2013)](https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007%2F978-1-4419-9863-7_703)

Studies have shown that the increased accumulation of lactate affects
the pH of the media, thereby leading to a hostile environment for the
cultivated cells. In addition to the detrimental effect of lactate,
accumulation of ammonia is also considered to impart cell damage. Cells
utilize glutamine present in the growth media not only for the
biosynthetic pathways of purine and pyrimidine synthesis but also as a
major energy source. Cells utilize glutamine for their metabolism
leaving behind ammonia as the metabolic waste (Schneider, Marison, & Von
Stockar, 1996).

The accumulation of these two metabolic wastes in the media increases
the toxicity of the media and causes tissue damage. To overcome the
increased accumulation of lactate, the cells die and release an enzyme
called Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH), which converts lactate into pyruvate
(Legrand et al., 1992).

**Proposed Solution -- "Co-culture system"**

Microalgae are autotrophic microorganisms that utilize carbon-di-oxide
and nitrogen compounds and excretes oxygen during the photosynthesis
process. They can be considered as "miniature plants" as they also use
the photosynthesis process for producing valuable biocomponents. With
this background, Haraguchi et al., (2017) conducted an innovative study
where the mammalian cells C2C12 and Rat Cardiac Cell sheet are
co-cultured along with microalgae, Chlorococcum littorale. Co-culture is
a system where the mammalian cells and the microalgae are cultured in
the same dish, as they proceed to grow and live by having close
interaction with each other. This study shows that the co-culture system
of mammalian cells and microalgae exhibits a symbiotic relationship,
where the oxygen excreted by the microalgae got utilized by the
mammalian cells and in turn, the microalgae utilize the mammalian
metabolic waste -- carbon-di-oxide and ammonia, for their photosynthetic
process. In simple terms, the waste excreted by microalgae is utilized
by the mammalian cells as a nutrient source and vice-versa for the
microalgal cells. This efficient usage of waste metabolites has
facilitated the mammalian cells to consume less glucose from the media,
thereby reducing the lactate accumulation, which we discussed as toxic
for the mammalian cells. Hence, the co-culture system has shown
promising results by reduced cell damage (Haraguchi et al., 2017).
Reduction of cell damage facilitates the cultivation of thicker cells
that can be further processed to obtain the exact meat-like texture and
therefore, achieve the meat-like sensory attributes like mouthfeel,
flavor, taste, etc., Figure 4 illustrates the co-culture system used for
the study.

Fig.4. Co-culture system with microalgae and mammalian cells (Haraguchi
et al., 2017)

**3-D Tissue Fabrication**

Haraguchi et al., (2021) conducted a study using the co-culture system
where mammalian cell C2C12 and microalgae, Chlorella vulgaris, were
cultivated to produce thicker cells. In that study, they found that the
release of lactate dehydrogenase has been reduced to one-seventh
compared to the normal mammalian cell cultivation. This means the
cultivation of thicker cells with improved cell damage is possible via
the co-culture system. Cultivation of thicker cells using animal cells
alone leads to tissue damage due to the accumulation of toxic metabolic
wastes like lactate. But the co-culture system has shown improved
efficiency for fabricating thicker cells of 200-400 μm without incurring
major tissue damage. This can be a potential tool for producing thicker
and nutrient-rich cultured food (Haraguchi & Shimizu, 2021). Thicker
tissues provide better texture when subjected to the 3D fabrication
process. Figure 5 displays the increased cell thickness produced by the
co-culture system.

[Fig. 5. Difference of tissue thickness between monoculture and
co-culture (Haraguchi &
Shimizu, 2021)](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/349959168_Three-dimensional_tissue_fabrication_system_by_co-culture_of_microalgae_and_animal_cells_for_production_of_thicker_and_healthy_cultured_food)

**Recombinant Microalgae**

A study by Haraguchi et al., (2021) shows that the co-culture system
shows reduced LDH production when the cells are cultivated at 30°C. At
37°C, the LDH production seems to be high due to the increased cell
damage. As we have discussed earlier, the increase in lactate
accumulation triggers the LDH release from the tissues by altering the
pH of the media. To convert the lactate into pyruvate without damaging
the cells, we propose the solution of making the microalgae release the
LDH by recombinant technology (Valvona, Fillmore, Nunn, &
Pilkington, 2016).

Isolation of the gene LDH-A, which produces the LDH enzyme, from the
mammalian cells and transferring it to the microalgal cells can be
achieved via numerous methods like electroporation, Agrobacterium
tumefaciens -- mediated, particle bombardment, etc., Microalgal
chloroplast genomes have been proven to be efficient for the expression
of foreign proteins (Potvin & Zhang, 2010), in our case, it is the LDH
enzyme. This entire process is similar to the production of soy
leghemoglobin produced by the Impossible for their burgers, but instead
of soy leghemoglobin, we aim at producing LDH enzyme.

This can be a potential solution as the co-culture system has already
been proved to be efficient for thicker tissue fabrication. In times of
increased lactate accumulation, the microalgae will release the LDH in
response to maintain the pH, thereby keeping the environment in the
medium intact that is suitable for the growth of healthier tissues.

Intact thicker cells then can be harvested and processed to provide the
necessary texture to provide the sensory needs that consumers expect
from meat. The proposed solution aims at eliminating the toxic wastes
that affect the tissues, thereby providing healthy tissues that exactly
replicate the animal tissues in terms of texture and taste.

**Conclusion**

Cellular agriculture is an innovative field that comes with promising
solutions for the global problems that we are facing currently. As an
innovative field, it also possesses challenges that need to be solved by
scientific work. The proposed solution of the co-culture system where
the symbiotic relationship between the mammalian cells and the
microalgal cells are achieved shows promising results that it can be
used as a tool for fabricating thick and nutrient-rich cultivated meat.
This could advance the rate of cellular meat cultivation to enter the
consumer market soon.

**References**

Arshad, M. S., Sohaib, M., Ahmad, R. S., Nadeem, M. T., Imran, A.,
Arshad, M. U., ... Amjad, Z. (2018). Ruminant meat flavor influenced by
different factors with special reference to fatty acids. Lipids in
health and disease, 17(1), 1-13.

Buchsteiner, M., Quek, L. E., Gray, P., & Nielsen, L. K. (2018).
Improving culture performance and antibody production in CHO cell
culture processes by reducing the Warburg effect. Biotechnology and
bioengineering, 115(9), 2315-2327.

Carletti, E., Motta, A., & Migliaresi, C. (2011). Scaffolds for tissue
engineering and 3D cell culture. 3D cell culture, 17-39.

Cultivated meat scaffolding \| Deep dive \| GFI. Retrieved 29 August
2021, from
\<[https://gfi.org/science/the-science-of-cultivated-meat/deep-dive-cultiv...](https://gfi.org/science/the-science-of-cultivated-meat/deep-dive-cultivated-meat-scaffolding/%3E);

Djisalov, M., Knežić, T., Podunavac, I., Živojević, K., Radonic, V.,
Knežević, N. Ž., ... Gadjanski, I. (2021). Cultivating
Multidisciplinarity: Manufacturing and Sensing Challenges in Cultured
Meat Production. Biology, 10(3), 204.

Eibl, R., Senn, Y., Gubser, G., Jossen, V., van den Bos, C., & Eibl, D.
(2021). Cellular Agriculture: Opportunities and Challenges. Annual
Review of Food Science and Technology, 12, 51-73.

Haraguchi, Y., Kagawa, Y., Sakaguchi, K., Matsuura, K., Shimizu, T., &
Okano, T. (2017). Thicker three-dimensional tissue from a "symbiotic
recycling system" combining mammalian cells and algae. Scientific
reports, 7(1), 1-10.

Haraguchi, Y., & Shimizu, T. (2021). Three-dimensional tissue
fabrication system by co-culture of microalgae and animal cells for
production of thicker and healthy cultured food. Biotechnology letters,
43(6), 1117-1129. How Is Cultivated Meat Made?. (2021). Retrieved 29
August 2021, from \<<https://www.whatiscultivatedmeat.com/process%3E>;

Lab Grown Meat --- Everything You Need to Know About Cultured Meat.
Retrieved 29 August 2021, from
\<<https://cellbasedtech.com/lab-grown-meat%3E>;

Legrand, C., Bour, J., Jacob, C., Capiaumont, J., Martial, A., Marc, A.,
... Duval, D. (1992). Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity of the number
of dead cells in the medium of cultured eukaryotic cells as marker.
Journal of biotechnology, 25(3), 231-243.

O'Neill, E. N., Cosenza, Z. A., Baar, K., & Block, D. E. (2021).
Considerations for the development of cost‐effective cell culture media
for cultivated meat production. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science
and Food Safety, 20(1), 686-709.

Potvin, G., & Zhang, Z. (2010). Strategies for high-level recombinant
protein expression in transgenic microalgae: a review. Biotechnology
advances, 28(6), 910-918.

Schneider, M., Marison, I. W., & Von Stockar, U. (1996). The importance
of ammonia in mammalian cell culture. Journal of biotechnology,
46(3), 161-185.

Valvona, C. J., Fillmore, H. L., Nunn, P. B., & Pilkington, G. J.
(2016). The regulation and function of lactate dehydrogenase a:
therapeutic potential in brain tumor. Brain pathology, 26(1), 3-17.

Venkatesh, K. V., Darunte, L., & Bhat, P. J. (2013). Warburg Effect. In
W. Dubitzky, O. Wolkenhauer, K.-H. Cho, & H. Yokota (Eds.), Encyclopedia
of Systems Biology (pp. 2349-2350). New York, NY: Springer New York.
