---
title: "Reimagining Global Protein Production for the 21st Century"
date: 2022-03-15 11:48:59
lastmod: 2022-03-15 11:48:59
slug: reimagining-global-protein-production-21st-century
description: "What options are on the food-tech menu for achieving long-term protein security? Cell culture, plants, microorganisms, algae, and fungi may all have roles to play. But from a sustainability and resilience perspective, is there a clear winner?"
excerpt: "What options are on the food-tech menu for achieving long-term protein security? Cell culture, plants, microorganisms, algae, and fungi may all have roles to play. But from a sustainability and resilience perspective, is there a clear winner?"
proteins: [Cell-Based, Plant-Based, Microbial, Algae, Fungi, Insect, Animal]
products: [Meat, Dairy, Eggs, Seafood, Ingredients]
topics: [Environment, Sci-Tech]
regions: [International]
flags: [Featured, Opinion]
directory: [699, 1143, 1262, 1358, 10548]
contributors: [10534]
images: ["Reimagining global protein production_0.jpg"]
featured_image: "Reimagining global protein production_0.jpg"
draft: false
weight: 5000
uuid: 10533
---
***What options are on the food-tech menu for achieving long-term
protein security? Cell culture, plants, microorganisms, algae, and fungi
may all have roles to play. But from a sustainability and resilience
perspective, is there a clear winner?***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It's a struggle to remain optimistic about the future these days. As if
the COVID pandemic wasn't enough, recent extreme weather events around
the world are likely to become more common as the planet gets warmer.
Yet despite all the warnings and calls for action, the uphill climb
towards a carbon-neutral global economy remains steep. As the world's
population continues to grow, so do per-capita consumption levels across
numerous sectors necessary for improving basic standards of living.
Given the earth's limited size and resource constraints, this state of
affairs is obviously not sustainable: unless humanity reconfigures its
use of natural resources, we will soon reach a breaking point.

Food lies very much at the center of this conundrum. The way we
currently produce food exacts huge costs on the environment through
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, biodiversity loss, land degradation, and
freshwater depletion. These effects threaten our ability to maintain
future food output in the forms of agricultural yields and marine
fishery catches. And if we cannot produce higher volumes of food within
our current geographical footprint, we will be forced to continue
expanding it. But such expansion would further increase environmental
harms, even further threatening future food production levels, thus
necessitating even more expansion, and so on in a downward spiral.

But there may be hope on the horizon. Consider for a moment that the way
we produce food has not fundamentally changed in the millennia since the
Neolithic revolution. In contrast, other technological realms such as
medicine, transportation, informatics, and communication have
transformed dramatically in just the past thousand years. But if a
Bronze Age farmer or fisherman were to somehow travel through time to
the present, he or she would have no trouble recognizing a farm or a
fishing vessel. Granted, thanks to breakthroughs in engineering and
breeding methods, we are capable of far greater harvests today than in
the past. But our main mechanisms for food production -- plants and
animals -- reflect a comparatively unevolved technological paradigm. As
a result, we're now beginning to approach the limit of edible calories
and nutrients we can extract from the biosphere through these
methods alone.

Is there some way we can "hack" the global food system to circumvent its
current biophysical limits while minimizing harm to the natural
environment? The first step towards considering such solutions requires
an understanding of food defined by what it consists of, rather than how
it's produced. For instance, all the foods in your kitchen have one key
thing in common: they are made up of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins
in various combinations. This is a useful starting point for what
qualifies as food for humans. Food also needs to satisfy two other
important criteria: it must be digestible, which leaves out cellulosic
materials such as wood and most leaves; and it must be non-toxic, which
disqualifies many otherwise nutritious fruits, seeds, tubers,
and mushrooms.

So if carbohydrates, fats, and proteins make up the desired end point,
how can we get there with as little environmental impact as possible? In
this article I focus specifically on protein, as it's by far the most
problematic macronutrient with regard to the environmental challenges
mentioned above.

**Building blocks**

Chemically, protein is made up of five elements: carbon, nitrogen,
sulfur, oxygen, and hydrogen. Among these, it's the first three that
make food production such a complicated affair. The most common forms of
carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur in the natural environment are carbon
dioxide gas (CO2), nitrogen gas (N2) and sulfate ions (SO42--),
respectively. As humans, we lack the biochemical machinery to take up
these three compounds from the surrounding environment and convert them
directly into protein. Instead, we rely on other forms of life to carry
out these processes for us and then simply eat those organisms to
acquire the protein within their tissues.

Consider a pea plant, for instance. It first converts CO2 to sugar
through photosynthesis. Some of that sugar is then used to supply the
carbon for making protein. Nitrogen gas is not directly accessible for
biochemical conversion by any plant, but legumes such as pea plants can
form symbiotic relationships with soil bacteria that do have the ability
to convert nitrogen gas into other nitrogen compounds, which the plant
can then use to make protein. Lastly, sulfur in the form of sulfate ions
can be absorbed directly from the surrounding soil and then used for
protein production.

From this perspective, when gazing out over a field of crops, what we're
actually looking at is thousands of small, solar-powered chemical
converters turning otherwise inaccessible forms of carbon, nitrogen, and
sulfur into protein and other nutrients. But a significant portion of
the crops we grow are not directly consumed by us. Instead, they're fed
to animals in order to produce higher value protein-rich foods such as
meat, dairy, and eggs. This extra conversion step separating our plates
from the original crops results in significant losses of potential food
calories, nutrients, and water -- not to mention the added environmental
costs of maintaining large populations of animals for human consumption.

**What's on the food-tech menu?**

If plants and animals are our current state-of-the-art technologies,
what options exist for tweaking, or even reconfiguring, global protein
production systems? Given its disproportionate resource requirements and
environmental impact, animal protein is low-hanging fruit. If we could
somehow decrease the world's consumption of animal-based foods,
agriculture's environmental footprint would shrink significantly,
including a sizable chunk of total GHG emissions. The problem is that
production of animal-based foods is still trending upward due to [strong
consumer
demand](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0195666319301047)
and [government
support](https://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/cb6562en) around the
world. And this trend is likely to continue: In many emerging economies,
where populations are growing most rapidly, such foods are often
considered a sign of status, and shifting from traditionally
plant-centric to more animal-based protein foods remains aspirational.

One approach to offsetting the consumption of animal-based foods such as
meat and dairy has been the development of increasingly realistic
plant-based analogs. If such products could be adopted at high enough
levels, this would indeed be an elegant solution. However, [recent
retail
data](http://jaysonlusk.com/blog/2021/11/16/slump-in-sales-of-meat-alternatives)
suggests we're still far away from such adoption levels, while other
[research
shows](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac4fda)
these products may not displace livestock as simply as many had hoped.
Perhaps more fundamentally, in a scenario where the planet continues to
get warmer, plant protein production will become increasingly vulnerable
to extreme weather events and land degradation, compromising its
potential as a long-term solution for global food security.

Now let us consider two alternative sources of animal protein that are
currently receiving a lot of attention: insects and cell-cultured meat.

Insects are increasingly promoted as a sustainable source of protein due
to their lower environmental footprint compared to conventional
livestock. In addition, the cultivation of insects isn't subject to many
of the animal welfare concerns or legislation of vertebrate production
animals, such as cattle, poultry, and farmed fish. However, like all
animal-based sources of protein, there remains an unavoidable efficiency
gap when converting plants to insect protein, making the direct
consumption of plant-protein the better option. At the moment, the
insect protein sector is therefore focused primarily on using high-grade
food waste as a feedstock for rearing insects intended for human
consumption. As such, the potential global output of insect protein
remains limited by the supply of high-grade food waste, and ongoing
efforts to reduce food waste could therefore actually reduce our
capacity to produce human-grade insect protein.

What about cell-cultured meat? To begin with, there are no animal
welfare issues: Cultured muscle cells are quite happy to be densely
packed together inside climate-controlled bioreactors. We can also
expect the efficiency of converting feed to animal protein to be much
higher, with significantly lower water consumption. In addition, this
process focuses exclusively on the part of the animal we wish to eat
(muscle tissue) without producing all of the inedible and less desirable
body parts, such as feathers, bones, and internal organs.

However, there are some significant drawbacks to this technology, with
the first one being cost. Cultivating muscle cells outside an animal's
body is complicated. It requires advanced bioreactors, a very
specialized mixture of nutrients and growth factors, as well as highly
trained staff to operate and monitor the production process. These
constraints put it far beyond the reach of most developing economies
where animal husbandry, on the other hand, has been practiced for
millennia with decidedly low-tech requirements: farmers merely need to
keep their livestock watered, fed, sheltered from the elements, and
protected from predators. From this view, livestock may be seen as much
cheaper, walking, self-replicating bioreactors.

The second major drawback of cell-cultured meat has to do with the
fundamental nutritional requirements of animal cells. Animals acquire
the bulk of their nitrogen, as well as nearly all their sulfur, in the
form of protein. Plants and fungi, on the other hand, can assimilate
sulfate directly, as well as inorganic forms of nitrogen such as ammonia
(NH3) and nitrate (NO3--). In practice, this means that regardless of
whether one is farming whole animals or clumps of muscle cells, they
still need to be provided with a protein source, usually of plant
origin. From an efficiency perspective, this again raises the question
of why we shouldn't just eat the plant protein. Even if the feed protein
conversion ratio --- the proportion of protein in the feed that ends up
consumable by humans as meat --- proves higher in cultured animal cells
than in whole animals, it's still less efficient than simply eating the
plant protein directly.

One final drawback of cell-cultured meat is that whole animals have
digestive systems while muscle cells do not. Mammalian herbivores,
especially ruminants, can digest recalcitrant plant sugars such as
cellulose and pectin thanks to the diverse microbial flora inhabiting
their digestive tract. Muscle cells lack a comparable enzymatic toolbox
and must be provided with much more digestible substrates such as the
simple sugar glucose. Thus, even though ruminants contribute to GHG
emissions through enteric production of methane (CH4), their ability to
digest cellulose allows for exploitation of land for pasture that might
not be suitable for growing crops.

Given the above considerations, we can safely say that plants remain the
most sustainable conventional protein source for direct human
consumption, but they are vulnerable to changes in climate, depletion of
freshwater, and soil degradation. Edible insects and cell-cultured meat
offer better protein conversion rates than animals, but they offer no
efficiency advantages over direct consumption of plant-based protein.
Are there any other options?

One alternative to conventional land-based protein sources is [algal
protein](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10811-016-0974-5) --
both microscopic algae as well as macroalgae such as kelp. Cultivation
of marine macroalgae does not require soil or freshwater, offering a
major advantage over land-based protein crops. However, macroalgae
cultivated in coastal waters are still vulnerable to natural
disturbances such as storms, [marine heat
waves](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aba5244), algivorous
pests, and diseases. Marine macroalgae are also prone to [accumulating
toxic
metals](https://academic.oup.com/nutritionreviews/article/77/5/307/5370317)
such as cadmium, and can contain unhealthy levels of iodine. Certain
microscopic algae (such as
[spirulina](https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/mr.47.4.551-578.1983)
and *Chlorella*) have very good nutrient profiles, but open cultivation
of microalgae in pond systems is [vulnerable to
contamination](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0960852412016677)
by toxic algae and single-celled algivorous predators. These problems
can be overcome by using closed cultivation systems, but not without
incurring much higher production costs.

**The magic of microorganisms**

This brings us to our final option: [microbial
protein](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12571-019-00912-3).
This category encompasses bulk protein derived from fungal mycelium
([mycoprotein](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781845697587500137)),
yeast, bacteria, and other microorganisms. Just like plants, most
microorganisms can utilize inorganic sources of nitrogen and sulfur and
therefore don't need to be supplied with protein as do animal cells.
More importantly, microorganisms can acquire carbon from a wide variety
of sources: in addition to sugars and fats, many can also assimilate
hydrocarbons, alcohols, and organic acids.

Similar to muscle cells, cultivation of microorganisms requires
bioreactors to ensure efficient conversion of the nutrient feedstock
into protein, while preventing contamination by unwanted microbes.
Although this means that capital costs can also be high, the cultivation
parameters of microorganisms are considerably less complicated than
those of muscle cells. For example, muscle cells require a solid
scaffold to support their growth, while microbial cells can be
cultivated to high densities simply by being suspended in large volumes
of liquid growth medium, provided that they are continuously stirred
and aerated.

Bioreactors also confer one significant advantage over other kinds of
conventional protein production: their internal environments
(temperature, pH, nutrient composition, etc.) can be precisely
controlled irrespective of external conditions. This means that
microbial protein can be produced pretty much anywhere on the planet
regardless of local climate conditions. It's also worth noting that
bioreactors enable three-dimensional cultivation, while plant and algal
proteins are confined to two-dimensional production systems due to their
dependence on sunlight for photosynthesis. Compared to soy, for example,
[the largest
bioreactors](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cite.330581203)
for microbial cultivation can produce in the range of one million times
more protein per surface area unit per year.

**What about feedstock?**

But just like cell-based meat and edible insects, microbial protein
production is constrained by the availability of feedstock. That means
the geographical footprint and resource efficiency of microbial protein
compared to plant-based, cell-based, algal, or insect protein ultimately
depends on how the microorganisms acquire their carbon and nitrogen.
Protein-rich legumes such as soybeans, peas, and lentils can assimilate
both atmospheric CO2 and nitrogen gas directly thanks to photosynthesis
(within their leaves) and bacterial nitrogen fixation (within their root
nodules), respectively. Like plants, most microorganisms can use ammonia
as a nitrogen feedstock, which can be synthesized chemically from
nitrogen gas using [the Haber-Bosch industrial
process](https://www.nature.com/articles/22672). That leaves carbon. At
present, microbial protein products commercially available for human
consumption such as
[Marmite](https://www.gamberorossointernational.com/news/the-curious-story-of-marmite-spread-made-with-brewers-yeast-extract/)
(derived from spent brewer's yeast) and
[Quorn](https://www.proteinreport.org/directory/quorn) mycoprotein rely
on sugar as their carbon feedstock. Since this requires arable land for
the cultivation of sugar cane or sugar beet, it's unlikely there are
significant reductions in geographical footprint of these compared to
plant-based protein products.

One alternative to conventional sugar feedstocks is to instead use
[inedible
carbohydrates](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-10-5873-8_3)
such as cellulose and pectin. These are abundant and can be cheaply
sourced from waste products of agriculture and forestry or harvested
directly from natural vegetation. But they do require complex treatments
with chemicals and enzymes to release simpler sugars the microbial cells
can convert into cellular protein, and the high cost of enzymes for
cellulose and pectin depolymerization remains a major obstacle to using
these types of feedstocks.

However, as previously mentioned, many microorganisms can also use other
types of carbon feedstocks such as hydrocarbons, alcohols, organic
acids, or even CO2. During the 1960s, before the Green Revolution, which
dramatically increased yields for key staple crops, many nations were
considering using [fossil
fuels](https://www.nature.com/articles/211735b0) as a carbon substrate
for production of microbial protein. Today, this would be out of the
question since any fossil carbon fed to microorganisms would be respired
into atmospheric CO2, no differently than if it had been burned as fuel.
However, methane derived from anaerobic digestion of organic material
such as food waste or manure, can be used to cultivate specialized
methane-consuming bacteria.

**Going photosynthesis-free**

Many simple organic compounds such as
[methane](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41929-019-0244-4),
[methanol](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/anie.201204995)
(CH3OH), and [acetic
acid](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/1996/dt/dt9960002187)
(CH3COOH) can also be synthesized chemically from CO2 and used to
cultivate microorganisms for protein. This could be revolutionary since
it would mean protein can potentially be produced in the complete
absence of photosynthesis. Examples of microorganisms that could be
cultivated in this way include regular brewer's yeast and the
mycoprotein fungus *Fusarium venenatum*, both of which are capable of
growing on acetic acid instead of sugar as their carbon feedstock.

The CO2 for feedstock synthesis can be supplied by different means. One
way is to heat organic waste matter such as wood or plastic to high
enough temperatures that they deteriorate into a mixture of CO2, carbon
monoxide, and hydrogen gas known as syngas. CO2 could also be captured
from industrial emissions (flue gas) or directly from ambient air using
a process known as direct air capture (DAC). In both cases, a
specialized material binds the CO2 directly and retains it until the
material is compelled to release the bound CO2, typically by heating.

Additionally, [some
bacteria](https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/enb.2020.0005)
can convert CO2 directly into cellular protein using chemosynthesis -- a
process similar to photosynthesis but powered by the oxidation of
inorganic chemical compounds (e.g., hydrogen gas) instead of light
energy. The concept of using chemosynthetic bacteria as an alternative
food source dates back to at least [the early
1960s](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bit.260060406)
when NASA was looking into food production systems suitable for space
travel. Recently, a number of biotech startups such as [Solar
Foods](https://www.proteinreport.org/directory/solar-foods) and [Air
Protein](https://www.proteinreport.org/directory/air-protein) have
revived this concept and are busy developing bacterial protein products
for both food and animal feed.

Producing microbial protein in the complete absence of photosynthesis
could have enormous implications for the geographical footprint of our
food systems. [A recent
study](https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.2015025118) published
in the *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences* projected that
a solar-powered process for the production of microbial protein, through
either chemical conversion of CO2 into organic feedstocks or hydrogen
gas-dependent chemosynthetic growth, would use roughly ten percent of
the land area required to produce an equivalent amount of soy protein.

However, microbial protein's potential independence from light energy
opens up possibilities for the use of other zero-emission energy sources
such as wind, hydro, geothermal, and even nuclear power. As with solar,
these energy sources can be used to capture and convert CO2 into organic
feedstocks for microbial cultivation. In the case of chemosynthetic
bacteria, the bulk of the energy would be used for electrolysis of water
to produce hydrogen gas. Depending on the [power
density](https://energycentral.com/c/ec/future-energy-why-power-density-matters)
of the energy source, the geographical footprint could shrink to [well
below one
percent](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2019.00032/full)
of the land area required to yield an equivalent amount of soy protein.

Another crucial advantage of microbial protein over other sources is its
potential for a significantly reduced water footprint. Many
microorganisms suitable for protein production are also salt-tolerant to
the extent that they could be cultivated in brackish water or even
seawater. If seawater can be used for the cultivation process, the issue
of water footprint essentially disappears.

Microorganisms even have one more trick up their sleeve: they can be
genetically engineered to produce animal proteins such as those found in
milk (casein) and eggs (ovalbumin). These recombinant animal proteins
could be used to substitute their "natural" counterparts in a wide range
of processed foods. Dairy products using recombinant casein from
engineered brewer's yeast are already [commercially
available](https://www.proteinreport.org/directory/perfect-day-foods) in
the United States. Meanwhile, researchers in Finland have managed to
engineer a wood-degrading fungus to [secrete egg
protein](https://www.vttresearch.com/en/news-and-ideas/egg-white-protein-production-technology-without-chickens-awarded-earto)
instead of the enzymes it would typically use to digest cellulose and
other recalcitrant plant materials. So far, these engineered
microorganisms are using a sugar feedstock. But re-engineering them to
use organic feedstocks derived directly from captured CO2 instead is
perfectly achievable.

In this article, I have tried to briefly present the current options for
global protein production, noting the main benefits and shortcomings of
each in terms of capacity, sustainability, and resilience. Animal
sources of protein, whether whole-animal or cell-cultured, fare the
worst in this comparison due to their inability to synthesize protein
from non-protein precursors such as ammonia and sulfate. Terrestrial
plants and algae are both fairly reliable protein sources in terms of
capacity and sustainability. However, their vulnerability to external
factors such extreme weather events, pests, and disease introduces a
significant degree of uncertainty for their potential to feed the global
population of tomorrow. Ultimately, microbial sources of protein appear
to offer the best profile for food security in a climatically uncertain
future --- provided that an appropriate feedstock is used for
cultivation, which excludes fossil hydrocarbons as well as food-grade
sugars. The use of atmospheric CO2 as a feedstock, either directly for
use by chemosynthetic bacteria or chemically converted to simple
organics, is clearly the most exciting configuration. However, the
complete process from CO2 capture to protein has yet to be demonstrated
at industrial scale.

Image credit: 10000 L bioreactors from Strategies for Enhanced
Production of Plant Secondary Metabolites from Cell and Organ
Cultures --- Scientific Figure on ResearchGate. Available from:
[https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Large-scale-10-000-L-bioreactors-developed-for-cultivating-adventitious-roots-of-ginseng_fig8_28142496](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Large-scale-10-000-L-bioreactors-developed-for-cultivating-adventitious-roots-of-ginseng_fig8_281424968)
